A glossary of terms most commonly used by clinical electroencephalographers and proposal for the report form for the EEG findingsS. Noachtar" (Germany), C. Binnie (UK), J. Ebersole (USA), F. Mauguiere (France), A. Sakamoto (Brazil) and B. Westmoreland (USA)       
       This glossary includes the terms most commonly used in clinical EEG. It is based on the previous proposal (Chatrian et al. 1974) and is limited to the terms necessary to describe the EEG and to generate the EEG report. All EEG phenomena should be described as precisely as possible in terms of frequency, amplitude, phase relation, waveform, localization, quantity, and variability of these parameters (Brazier et al. 1961). The description should be independent of the recording parameters such as amplification, paper speed, montages, and computer program/display. Biological and technical artifacts that interfere with an adequate EEG interpretation should either be eliminated or, if this is not possible, be noted in the description.       
The EEG report should follow a standard protocol that includes a description, and an interpretation of the EEG. The interpretation of the EEG requires knowledge of the patient's age and clinical condition during the EEG, particularly the level of consciousness/vigilance and the ability to cooperate. The EEG interpretation summarizes the results of the EEG and gives a clinical interpretation in light of the diagnosis and the questions of the referring physician. The terminology of the EEG interpretation should follow common neurological and clinical practice and use terms understandable to other physicians not necessarily specialized in EEG. A proposal for a report form is given in Appendix A.
Glossary      
      Absence: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG patterns. Terms suggested, when- ever appropriate: spike-and-slow-wave complex; 3/s spike-and-slow-wave complex; sharp-and-slow- wave complex.      Activation procedure: (1) Any procedure designed to enhance or elicit normal or abnormal EEG activity, especially paroxysmal activity. Examples: hyperventilation, photic stimulation, sleep, injection of convulsant drugs. (2) Induction of an EEG pattern consisting of a low voltage record which becomes apparent upon blocking of EEG rhythms by physiological or other stimuli such as electrical stimulation of the brain (use in this meaning discouraged).      Active electrode: Use of term discouraged. Comment: all electrodes may be active including all cephalic references. The use of this term may be acceptable when recording brain signals with a noncephalic reference electrode.      Activity, EEG: An EEG wave or sequence of waves.      After-discharge: (1) EEG seizure pattern following single or repetitive electrical stimulations of a discrete area of the brain via cortical or intracerebral electrodes. (2) Burst of rhythmic activity following a transient such as an evoked potential or a spike.      Aliasing: Distortion of the EEG signal, which occurs when the signal is digitized at less than half the highest frequency present (see Nyquist theorem).      Alpha band: Frequency band of 8-13 Hz. Greek letter: 0'..      Alpha rhythm: Rhythm at 8-13 Hz occurring during wakefulness over the posterior regions of the head, generally with maximum amplitudes over the occipital areas. Amplitude varies but is mostly below 50 uV in the adult. Best seen with the eyes closed and during physical relaxation and relative mental inactivity. Blocked or attenuated by attention, especially visual, and mental effort. Comment: use of term alpha rhythm must be restricted to those rhythms that fulfill these criteria. Activities in the alpha band which differ from the alpha rhythm as regards their topography and/or reactivity, should either have specific appellations (for instance: the mu [u] rhythm) or should be referred to as rhythms of alpha frequency, or alpha activity.      Alpha variant rhythms: Certain characteristic?EEG rhythms that are recorded most prominently?over the posterior regions of the head and differ in?frequency but resemble in reactivity the alpha?rhythm. Comment: often at a supra or sub-harmonic?of alpha frequency may occur when no alpha rhythm is visible (see: fast alpha valiant rhythm; slow alpha variant rhythm.      Alpha wave: Wave with duration of 1/8-1/13 s.      Alphoid rhythm: Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: alpha rhythm.      Amplitude: Voltage of EEG waves expressed in microvolts (uV). Measured peak-to-peak. Comment: size of an EEG wave is dependent?upon signal voltage divided by the pen writer or of display sensitivity. EEG depicts the difference in potential between electrode pairs. It is therefore dependent on the method of derivation and has no simple relationship to actual amount of cerebral activity. EEG waves recorded from the surface of  the head are attenuated and distorted by intervening structures, particularly the skull.      Analog-to-digital conversion (AD conversion): Transformation of a continuous, analog EEG into its digital representation (a discontinuous series of discrete amplitude measurements). AD conversion is characterized by the sampling rate, which is the number of times per second at which the signal is transformed into numbers, and the amplitude resolution, the number of numerical values which can be distinguished within the dynamic range of the system (usually expressed as the number of binary digits).      Aperiodic: Applies to: (1) EEG waves or complexes occurring in a sequence at an irregular rate, (2) EEG waves or complexes occurring intermittently at irregular intervals.      Apotentiality, record of cerebral: Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: record of electrocerebral inactivity.      Application, electrode: The process of establishing mechanical fixation and electrical connection between an electrode and the subject's scalp or brain.      Arrhythmic activity: A sequence of waves of inconstant period (see rhythm).      Arousal: Change from a lower to a higher level of arousal as manifest in EEG.      Array, electrode: A regular arrangement of electrodes over the scalp or brain or within the brain substance.      Artifact: (1) A potential difference due to an extracerebral source, recorded in EEG tracings. (2) A modification of the EEG caused by extracerebral factors such as alterations of the media surrounding the brain, instrumental distortion or malfunction, and operational errors.      Asymmetry: Unequal amplitude of EEG activities over homologous areas on opposite sides of the head.      Asynchrony: The non-simultaneous occurrence of EEG activities over regions on the same or opposite sides of the head.      Attenuation: (1) Reduction in amplitude of EEG activity. May occur transiently in response to physiological or other stimuli, such as electrical stimulation of the brain, or result from pathological conditions (see blocking). (2) Reduction of sensitivity of an EEG channel, i.e. decrease of output deflection during operation of sensitivity or filter controls. Customarily expressed as relative reduction of sensitivity at certain stated frequencies (see sensitivity; high frequency filter; low frequency filter).      Atypical spike-and-slow-wave complex: Paroxysms consisting of a sequence of spike-and- slow-wave complexes that occur bilaterally but do not meet the criteria of 3 per second spike-and-slow-wave complex.      Augmentation: Increase in amplitude of electrical activity.      Average potential reference: Average of the potentials of all or many EEG electrodes, used as a reference. Synonym: Goldman-Offner reference (use discouraged). Term suggested: common average reference.            Background activity: Any EEG activity representing the setting in which a given normal or abnormal pattern appears and from which such pattern is distinguished. Comment: not a synonym of any individual rhythm such as the alpha rhythm.      Background slow activity: The frequency of the background rhythm is below the normal value.      Band: Portion of EEG frequency spectrum, i.e.  delta, theta, alpha, beta bands.      Bandwidth, EEG channel: Range of frequencies between which the response of an EEG channel is within stated limits. Determined by the frequency response of the amplifier, pen writer, if any, and the frequency filters used. Comment: the manner in which the EEG channel bandwidth is specified by different manufacturers is not yet standardized. For instance, a bandwidth of 1-70 Hz in a given instrument may indicate that frequencies of 1 and 70 Hz are attenuated by 30% (3 dB) or another stated percent, with intermediate frequencies being less attenuated.      Basal electrode: Any electrode located in proxi- mity to the base of the skull (see foramen ovale electrode, nasopharyngeal electrode; sphenoidal electrode) .      Baseline: (1) Strictly: line obtained when an identical voltage is applied to the two input term- inals of an EEG amplifier or when the instrument is in the calibrate position but no calibration signal is applied. (2) Loosely: imaginary line corresponding to the approximate mean values of the EEG activity assessed visually in an EEG derivation over a period of time.      Benign epileptiform discharges of childhood: Regional or multiregional sharp waves, which are normally followed by a negative slow wave with lower amplitude than the negative peak of the sharp wave and which typically show a bipolar distribution with a positive sink in the mid frontal region. These sharp waves often have a multiregional distribution and are easy to recognize by their typical morphology. If they occur in the centrotemporal region, they are also called "Rolandic spikes". They typically increase during sleep and tend to appear in series.      Benign epileptiform transient of sleep (BETS): Small sharp spikes (SSS) of very short duration and low amplitude, often followed by a small theta wave, occurring in the temporal regions during drowsiness and light sleep. This pattern is of little clinical significance (see small sharp spikes).      Beta band: Frequency band from 14 to 40 Hz. Greek letter: Beta (see gamma band).      Beta rhythm: In general: any EEG rhythm between 14 and 40 Hz. Most characteristically: a rhythm from 14 to 40 Hz recorded over the frontocentral regions of the head during wakefulness. Amplitude of frontocentral beta rhythm varies but is mostly below 30uV Blocking or attenuation by contralateral movement or tactile stimulation is especially obvious in electrocorticograms. Other beta rhythms are most prominent in other locations or are diffuse.      Bilateral: Involving both sides of the head.      Bin width: Time, usually expressed in microseconds, elapsing between two successive sampling points in digital EEG (see digital EEG).Biological calibration: See common EEG input test.      Biparietal hump: Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: vertex sharp transient.      Biphasic wave: Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: diphasic wave.      Bipolar derivation: (1) Recording from a pair of electrodes. (2) Method of organizing the linkages of electrodes to recording channels (see bipolar montage).      Bipolar montage: Multiple bipolar derivations, with no electrode being common to all derivations. In most instances, bipolar derivations are linked, i.e. adjacent derivations from electrodes along the same line of electrodes have one electrode in common, connected to the input terminal 2 of one amplifier and to the input terminal 1 of the following amplifier (see reference montage).      Bisynchronous: Abbreviation for bilaterally synchronous (use discouraged).      Blacklead: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: input terminal 1.      Blocking: (1) Apparent, temporary obliteration of EEG rhythms in response to physiological or other stimuli such as electrical stimulation of the brain (see attenuation). (2) A condition of temporary unresponsiveness of the EEG amplifier, caused by major overload. Manifested initially by extreme, flat-topped trace excursion(s) lasting up to a few seconds (see overload, clipping).      Brain wave: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: EEG wave.      Brushes, delta: see delta brushes.      Buffer amplifier: An amplifier, generally with a voltage gain of 1, a high input impedance, and a low output impedance, used to isolate the input signal from the loading effects of an immediately following circuit. In some electroencephalographs, each input is connected to a buffer amplifier located in the jack box to reduce cable artifact and interference.      Build-up: Colloquialism. Frequently employed to describe progressive increase in voltage of the EEG or appearance of waves of increasing amplitude, frequently associated with decrease in frequency during hyperventilation. Sometimes applied to hyperventilation or seizure discharges (use discouraged).      Burst: A group of waves which appear and disappear abruptly and are distinguished from background activity by differences in frequency, form and/or amplitude. Comments: (1) term does not imply abnormality. (2) Not a synonym of paroxysm (see paroxysm).      Burst suppression: Pattern characterized by bursts of theta and/or delta waves, at times intermixed with faster waves, and intervening periods of low amplitude (below 20 uV). Comment: EEG pattern that indicates either severe brain dysfunction or is typical for some anesthetic drugs at certain levels of anesthesia.            C/s: See cycles per second. Equivalent: Hz.      Calibration: (1) Procedure of testing and recording the responses of EEG channels to voltage differences applied to the input terminals of their respective amplifiers. Comment: DC (usually) or AC voltages of magnitude comparable to the amplitudes of EEG waves are used in this procedure. (2) The procedure of testing the accuracy of paper speed by means of a time marker (see common EEG input test).      Cap, head: A cap that is fitted over the head to hold pad electrodes in position.      Channel: Complete system for the detection, amplification and display of potential differences between a pair of electrodes. Comment: analog electroencephalographs generally have several EEG channels. Digital EEG machines simulate a multichannel display by tracing several voltage time plots on a visual display.      Circumferential bipolar montage: A montage consisting of linked bipolar derivations in a circular shape around the head. Commonly bilateral longitudinal temporal electrode chains are linked together.      Clipping: Distortion of EEG waves which makes them appear flat-topped in the write-out or display. Caused by overload.      Closely spaced electrodes: Additional scalp electrode placed at half distance between the standard electrodes of the ten-twenty system (see ten-ten system, standard electrode, special electrode).      Comb rhythm: Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: mu (u) rhythm.      Common average reference: See average potential reference.      Common EEG input test: Procedure in which the same pair of EEG electrodes is connected to the two input terminals of all channels of the electroencephalograph. Synonym: biological calibration. Comment: used as adjunct to calibration procedure (see calibration).      Common mode rejection: A characteristic of differential amplifiers whereby they provide markedly reduced amplification of common mode signals, compared to differential signals. Expressed as common mode rejection ratio, i.e. ratio of amplifications of differential and common mode signals.       Example:       (amplification, differential) / (amplification, common mode) =100,000/1 = 100,000 : 1      Common mode signal: Common component of the two signals applied to the two input terminals of a differential EEG amplifier. Comment: in EEG recording, external capacitative interference frequently occurs as a common mode signal.      Common reference electrode: A reference electrode connected to the input terminal 2 of several or all EEG amplifiers.      Common reference montage: Several referential derivations sharing a single reference electrode (see referential derivation, reference electrode).      Complex: A sequence of two or more waves having a characteristic form or recurring with a fairly consistent form, distinguished from background activity.      Contingent negative variation: An event related slow potential elicited in the interval following a premonitory stimulus and a second stimulus to which the subject is required to make a voluntary response. It comprises a progressive negative-going change maximal at the vertex. Abbreviation: CNV .      Continuous slow activity: Slow activity that occurs continuously is non-responsive to external stimuli and clearly exceeds the amount considered physiologically normal for the patient's age. As a rule, it is irregular (polymorphic) and lies within the frequency range of delta/theta waves (see intermittent slow activity).      Coronal bipolar montage: A montage consisting of derivations from pairs of electrodes along coronal (transverse) linear arrays. Synonym: transverse bipolar montage.      Cortical electrode: Electrode applied directly upon or inserted in the cerebral cortex.      Cortical electroencephalogram: See electrocorticogram.      Cortical electroencephalography: See electrocorticography.?      Corticogram: Use discouraged.        Term suggested: electrocorticogram.      Corticography: Term preferred: electrocorticography.      Cycle: The complete sequence of potential changes undergone by individual components of a sequence of regularly repeated EEG waves or complexes.Cycles per second: Unit of frequency. Abbreviation: cis. Equivalent: Hertz (Hz).            Deep sleep: Non-REM sleep stages 3 and 4 (Rechtschaffen and Kales 1968).      Delta brushes: Rhythmic spindle-like activity (10-25 uV) superimposed on 0.3-1.5 Hz slow waves (25-250 uV) in preterm infants.      Delta band: Frequency band under 4 Hz. Greek letter: delta. Comment: for practical purposes lower frequency limit is 0.5 Hz, as DC potential differences are not monitored in conventional EEGs.      Delta brush: Delta wave with superimposed fast activity. Comment: normal finding in neonatal EEG.      Delta rhythm: Rhythm under 4 Hz.?      Delta wave: Wave with duration over 1/4 s.       Depression: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG patterns.?      Depth electrode: Electrode (usually multicontact electrode) implanted within the brain substance.      Depth electroencephalogram: Record of electrical activity of the brain by means of electrodes implanted within the brain substance itself (see stereotactic [stereotaxic] depth electroencephalogram).      Depth electroencephalography: Technique of recording depth electroencephalograms (see stereotactic [stereotaxic] depth electroencephalography).      Derivation: (1) The process of recording from a pair of electrodes in an EEG channel. (2) The EEG record obtained by this process.      Desynchronization: Use of term discouraged when visually describing EEG change. Terms suggested: blocking, attenuation. Exception: the term de synchronization is acceptable when describing attenuation of a frequency band based on power spectra analysis of the EEG signal (for instance “event-related desynchronization”).      Desynchronized: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG pattern (see low voltage EEG).      Diffuse: Occurring over large areas of one or both sides of the head (see generalized).      Differential amplifier: An amplifier whose output is proportional to the voltage difference between its two input terminals. Comment: electroencephalographs make use of differential amplifiers in their input stages.      Differential signal: Difference between two unlike signals applied to the respective two input terminals of a differential EEG amplifier.      Digital EEG: (1) The representation of an analog EEG signal by a series of numbers related to successive measurements of the magnitude of the signal at equal time intervals. (2) The practice of electroencephalography using digital representation of EEGs.      Diphasic wave: Complex consisting of two wave components developed on alternate sides of the baseline.      Dipole: A theoretical point-like EEG source produced by a separation of negative and positive charge. Comment: commonly used to describe a cortical source that generates an EEG field in which both negative and positive maxima can be recorded, e.g. the "horizontal dipole" of so called Rolandic spikes.      Dipolar: An EEG voltage field that displays both negative and positive maxima.      Direct coupled amplifier: An amplifier in which successive stages are connected (coupled) by devices. The performance of which is not frequency dependent.      Direct current amplifier: An amplifier that is capable of magnifying DC (zero frequency) voltages and slowly varying voltages.      Disk electrode: Metal disk attached to the scalp with an adhesive such as collodion or paste.      Discharge: Interpretive term commonly used to designate epileptiform and seizure patterns (see epileptiform pattern, seizure pattern).      Disorganization: Gross alteration in frequency, form, topography and/or quantity of physiologic EEG rhythms in (1) an individual record, relative to previous records in the same subject or the rhythms of homologous regions on the opposite side of the head or (2) relative to findings in normal subjects of similar age and similar state of vigilance.      Distortion: An instrument-induced alteration of wave form (see artifact).      Duration: (1) The interval from beginning to end of an individual wave or complex. Comment: the duration of the cycle of individual components of a sequence of regularly repeating waves or complexes is referred to as the period of the wave or complex. (2) The time that a sequence of waves or complexes or any other distinguishable feature lasts in an EEG record.      Dysrhythmia: Use of term discouraged.             Earth connection: Term discouraged. Synonym: ground connection (preferred term).      ECoG: Abbreviation for electrocorticogram and electrocorticography.      EEG: Abbreviation for electroencephalogram, electroencephalography and electroencephalographic.      Electrocorticogram: Record of EEG activity obtained by means of electrodes applied directly over or inserted in the cerebral cortex.        Abbreviation: ECoG.        Comment: electrocorticograms can be performed intraoperatively and extraoperatively.      Electrocorticography: Technique of recording electrical activity of the brain by means of electrodes applied over or implanted in the cerebral cortex.        Abbreviation: ECoG.        Comment: electrocorticography can be performed intraoperatively and extraoperatively.      Electrode, EEG: A conducting device applied over or inserted in a region of the scalp or brain.      Electrode impedance: Total effective resistance to alternating current (AC), arising from ohmic resistance and reactance. Measured between pairs of electrodes or, in some electroencephalographs, between each individual electrode and all the other electrodes connected in parallel. Expressed in ohms (generally kilo-ohms, kG). Comments: (1) over the EEG frequency range, because the capacitance factor is small, electrode impedance is usually equal to electrode resistance. (2) Not a synonym of input impedance of EEG amplifier (see electrode resistance; input impedance).      Electrode resistance: Total effective resistance to direct current (DC), through the interface between an EEG electrode and the scalp or brain. Measured between pairs of electrodes or, in some electroencephalographs, between each individual electrode and all the other electrodes connected in parallel. Expressed in ohms (generally kilo-ohms, k<ohm>). Comment: measurement of electrode resistance with DC currents results in varying degrees of electrode polarization (see electrode impedance).      Electroencephalogram: Record of electrical activity of the brain taken by means of electrodes placed on the surface of the head, unless otherwise specified.        Abbreviation: EEG.      Electroencephalograph: Instrument employed to record electroencephalograms.      Electroencephalographic: Appertaining to bioelectrical recording, irrespective of the method employed (in the present context, EEG, ECoG, SEEG, etc.)      Electroencephalography: (1) The science relating to the electrical activity of the brain. (2) The practice of recording and interpreting electro- encephalograms.        Abbreviation: EEG.Electrogram: Use of term discouraged. Electrography: Use of term discouraged. Encoches frontal: Frontal sharp waves innewborns.?      Epidural electrode: Electrode located over the dural covering of the cerebrum.?      Epileptic pattern: Use of term discouraged.Term suggested: epileptiform pattern.      Epileptiform pattern: Synonym: epileptiform discharge, epileptiform activity. Describes transients distinguishable from background activity, with a characteristic spiky morphology, typically, but neither exclusively nor invariably, found in interictal EEGs of people with epilepsy.      Epoch: A period of time in an EEG record. Duration of epochs is determined arbitrarily.        Example: power spectra were calculated from 10-s epochs.      Equipotential: Applies to regions of the head or electrodes that are at the same potential at a given instant in time.        Synonym: isopotential line.      Event-related (slow) potential: Applied mainly to those evoked potentials elicited by cognitive activities.        Abbreviation: ERP (see evoked potential).      Evoked potential: Wave or complex elicited by and time-locked to a physiological or non-physiological stimulus or event, the timing of which can be reliably assessed, for instance, an electrical stimulus, delivered to a sensory receptor or nerve or applied directly to a discrete area of the brain or a movement (myoclonus).        Comment: computer summation techniques are especially suitable for detecting these and other event-related potentials from the surface of the head.      Evoked response: Tautology. Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: evoked potential.      Extracerebral potential: Any potential that does not originate in the brain, referred to as an artifact in EEG. May arise from electrical interference external to the subject and recording system, the subject, the electrodes and their connections to the subject and the electroencephalograph, and the electroencephalograph itself (see artifact).             Fast activity: Activity of frequency higher than alpha, i.e. beta and gamma activity.      Fast alpha variant rhythm: Characteristic rhythm at 14-20 Hz, detected most prominently over the posterior regions of the head. May alternate or be intermixed with alpha rhythm. Blocked or attenuated by attention, especially visual, and mental effort.      Fast wave: Wave with duration shorter than alpha waves, i.e. under 1/13 s.      Flat EEG: Use of term discouraged (see low voltage EEG; record of electrocerebral inactivity).      Focal: Limited to a small area of the brain, i.e. recorded in one or two intracranial electrodes (see regional, multifocal).      Focus: A limited region of the scalp, cerebral cortex, or depth of the brain displaying a given EEG activity, either normal or abnormal.      Foramen ovale electrode: A multicontact electrode bundle inserted through the foramen ovale to lie in proximity to the parahippocampal gyrus. Comment: used for presrugical assessment of epilepsy of suspected mesial temporal origin.      Form: Shape of a wave. Synonym: wave form, morphology.      Fourteen- and 6-Hz positive burst: Burst of arch-shaped waves at 13-17 Hz and/or 5-7 Hz but most commonly at 14 and or 6 Hz seen generally over the posterior temporal and adjacent areas of one or both sides of the head during sleep. The sharp peaks of its component waves are positive with respect to other regions. Amplitude varies but is generally below 75 uV.        Comments: (1) best demonstrated by referential recording using contralateral earlobe or other remote, reference electrodes. (2) This pattern is of no established clinical significance.      Fourteen- and 6-Hz positive spikes:        Synonym: 14- and 6-Hz positive burst.      Frequency: Number of complete cycles of repetitive waves or complexes in 1 s. Measured in cycles per second (c/s) or Hertz (Hz).        Comment: the term Hz seems appropriate when applied to sinusoidal waves such as alpha activity, but seems inappropriate when applied to complex wave forms such as spike-and-slow-wave.      Frequency response: see bandwidth, low frequency response, high frequency response.      Frequency response curve: A graph depicting the relationships between output trace deflection or amplifier output and input frequency, for a particular setting of low and high frequency filters.      Frequency spectrum: Range of frequencies composing the EEG. Divided into 5 bands termed delta, theta, alpha, beta and gamma (see delta, theta, alpha, beta, gamma bands).      Frontal intermittent rhythmic delta activity: Fairly regular, approximately sinusoidal or saw- tooth waves, mostly occurring in bursts at 1.5-2.5 Hz over the frontal areas of one or both sides of the head.        Abbreviation: FIRDA.        Comment: most commonly associated with unspecified encephalopathy.            G1: Abbreviation for grid 1 (use of term discouraged)      G2: Abbreviation for grid 2 (use of term discouraged).      Gain: Ratio of output signal voltage to input signal voltage of an EEG channel.        Example:Gain = (output voltage)/(input voltage) = 10V/10uV = 1,000,000       Often expressed in decibels (dB), a logarithmic unit. Example: a voltage gain of 10 = 20 dB, of 1000 = 60 dB, of 1,000,000 = 120 dB (see sensitivity).?      Gamma band: Frequency band above 40 Hz.       Greek letter: <Beta> (see beta band).        Comment: practically, most electroencephalographs use trace writers that appreciably attenuate frequencies higher than 70 Hz. The customary use of relatively slow paper speeds or time scales further limits the electroencephalographer's ability to resolve visually waves of frequencies higher than 40 Hz. The graphic resolution of computer displays may also limit the visual appreciation of higher frequencies. However, this does not justify limiting unduly the high frequency response of the EEG channels, for EEG waves include transients such as spikes and sharp waves with components at frequencies above 50 Hz (see beta rhythm) (not a synonym).      Gamma rhythm: An EEG rhythm above 40 Hz.        Comment: most commonly recorded with intracranial electrodes.      Generalization: Propagation of EEG activity from limited areas to all regions of the head.      Generalized: Occurring over all regions of the head, usually with a frontal maximum, rarely with an occipital maximum.      Goldman-Offner reference: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: average potential reference.      Grand mal: Use of term discouraged.      Grid 1: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: input terminal 1.      Grid 2: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: input terminal 2.      Ground connection: Conducting path between the subject and the electroencephalograph, and the electroencephalograph and earth.        Synonym: earth connection.            Harness, head: A combination of straps fitted over the head to hold pad electrodes in position.      Hertz: Unit of frequency. Abbreviation: Hz. Synonym: cycles per second (c/s).      High frequency filter: A circuit that reduces the sensitivity of the EEG channel to relatively high frequencies. For each setting of the high frequency, filter, this attenuation is expressed as percent reduction in output trace deflection at a given frequency, relative to frequencies unaffected by the filter, i.e. in the mid-frequency band of the channel.        Synonym: low pass filter.        Comment: at present high frequency filter designations and their significance are not yet standardized for instruments of different manufactures. For instance, for a given instrument, a position of the high frequency filter control designated as 70 Hz may indicate a 30% (3 dB), or other stated percent, reduction in sensitivity at 70 Hz, compared to the sensitivity, for example, at 10 Hz.      High frequency response: Sensitivity of an EEG channel to relatively high frequencies. Determined by the high frequency response of the amplifier, pen writer, if any, and the high frequency filter used. Expressed as percent reduction in output trace deflection at certain specific high frequencies, relative to other frequencies in the mid-frequency band of the channel.      High pass filter: Synonym: low frequency filter.      Hyperexcitability, neuronal: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG patterns.      Hypersynchrony: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG patterns.      Hyperventilation: Deep and regular respiration performed for a period of several minutes. Used as activation procedure.        Synonym: overbreathing (see activation).      Hypsarrhythmia: Pattern consisting of diffuse high voltage (>300 uV) irregular slow waves interspersed with multi regional spikes and sharp waves over both hemispheres.      Hz: Abbreviation for Hertz.       Equivalent: cycles per second (c/s).             Impedance meter: An instrument used to measure impedance (see electrode impedance).      Inactive electrode: Use of term discouraged (see reference electrode) (not a synonym).      Inactivity, record of electrocerebral: Absence over all regions of the head of identifiable electrical activity of cerebral origin, whether spontaneous or induced by physiological stimuli or pharmacological agents.        Comment: determination of electro- cerebral inactivity requires stringent technical precautions. Tracings of electrocerebral inactivity should be clearly distinguished from low voltage EEGs and records displaying delta activity of low amplitude (see low voltage EEG).        Synonym: electrocerebral silence (use of term discouraged).      Independent (temporally): Synonym: asynchronous.      Index: Percent of time an EEG activity is present in an EEG sample.        Example: alpha index.      Indifferent electrode: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: reference electrode (not a synonym).      In-phase discrimination: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: common mode rejection (not a synonym).      In-phase signals: Waves with no phase difference between them (see common mode signal) (not a synonym).      Input: The signal fed into an EEG amplifier (see input terminal 1; input terminal 2).      Input terminal 1: The input terminal of the differential EEG amplifier at which negativity, relative to the other input terminal, produces an upward trace deflection.        Synonyms: "grid 1" (G1), black lead (use discouraged) (see polarity convention).        Comment: the connection of an electrode to the input terminal 1 of the EEG amplifier is represented in diagrams as a solid line.      Input terminal 2: The input terminal of the differential EEG amplifier at which negativity, relative to the other input terminal, produces a downward trace deflection.        Synonyms: "grid 2" (G2), white lead (use discouraged) (see polarity convention).        Comment: the connection of an electrode to the input terminal 2 of the EEG amplifier is represented in diagrams as a dotted or dashed line.      Input circuit: System consisting of the EEG electrodes and intervening tissues, the electrode leads, jack box, input cable, and electrode selectors.      Input impedance: Impedance that exists between the two inputs of an EEG amplifier. Measured in ohms (generally mega-ohms, M<Ohms>) with or without the additional specification of input shunt capacitance (measured in picofarads, pF).        Comment: not a synonym of electrode impedance.      Input voltage: Potential difference between the two input terminals of a differential EEG amplifier.       Interelectrode distance: Spacing between pairs of electrodes.        Comment: distances between adjacent electrodes placed according to the standard 10-20 system or more closely spaced electrodes are frequently referred to as short or small inter- electrode distances (10-10 system). Larger distances such as the double or triple distance between standard electrode placements are often termed long or large interelectrode distances.      Interhemispheric derivation: Recording between a pair of electrodes located on opposite sides of the head.      Intermittent slow activity: A slow activity that occurs intermittently and is not caused by drowsiness. Intermittent slow can be irregular or rhythmical (see continuous slow activity).      Intracerebral electrode.       Synonym: depth electrode      Intracerebral?electroencephalogram       Synonym: depth electroencephalogram.      Irregular: Applies to EEG waves and complexes of inconstant period and/or uneven contour.      Isoelectric: (1) The record obtained from a pair of equipotential electrodes (see equipotential). (2) Use of term discouraged when describing record of electrocerebral inactivity (see inactivity, record of electrocerebral).      Isolated: Occurring singly.             K complex: A burst of somewhat variable appearance, consisting most commonly of a high voltage negative slow wave followed by a smaller positive slow wave frequently associated with a sleep spindle. Amplitude is generally maximal in the frontal vertex. K complexes occur during non- REM sleep, apparently spontaneously, or in response to sudden sensory stimuli, and are not specific for any individual sensory modality (see vertex sharp transient).      Kappa rhythm: (Use of term discouraged). Rhythm consisting of bursts of alpha or theta frequency occurring over the temporal areas of the scalp of subjects engaged in mental activity.        Comments: (1) best recorded between electrodes located lateral to the outer canthus of each eye. (2) The cerebral origin of this rhythm is considered unproven. It is most probably an ocular artifact caused by discrete lateral oscillations of the eyes.            Lambda wave: Diphasic sharp transient occurring over the occipital regions of the head of waking subjects during visual exploration. The main component is positive relative to other areas. Time-locked to saccadic eye movement. Amplitude varies but is generally below 50 uV. Greek letter: <lambda>      Lambdoid wave: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: positive occipital sharp transient of sleep (POSTS).      Laplacian montage: Montage that can be used in digital EEG recordings and consists of a mathematical transformation involving the second spatial derivative; the Laplacian of the potential may be approximated by using the average of all neighboring electrodes as a reference for each site or electrode. Montage used for localization of focal abnormalities on digital EEG (see average potential reference).      Larval spike-and-slow-wave: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: 6-Hz spike-and-slow-wave.      Lateralized: Involving mainly the right or left side of the head (see unilateral; regional).      Lead: Strictly: wire connecting an electrode to the electroencephalograph. Loosely: synonym of electrode.      Light sleep: Non-REM sleep stages 1 and 2 (Rechtschaffen and Kales 1968).      Linkage: The connection of a pair of electrodes to the two respective input terminals of a differential EEG amplifier (see derivation).      Longitudinal bipolar montage: A montage consisting of derivations from pairs of electrodes along longitudinal, usually antero-posterior, arrays.      Low frequency filter: A circuit that reduces the sensitivity of the EEG channel to relatively low frequencies.        Synonym: high pass filter. For each position of the low frequency filter control, this attenuation is expressed as percent reduction of output trace deflection at a given stated frequency, relative to frequencies unaffected by the filter, i.e. in the mid-frequency band of the channel.       Comment: at present low frequency filter designations and their significance are not yet standardized for instruments of different manufacturers. For instance, in a given instrument, a low frequency filter setting designated I Hz may indicate a 30% (3 dB), or other stated percent, reduction in sensitivity at 1 Hz, compared to the sensitivity, for example, at 10 Hz. The same position of the low frequency filter setting may also be designated by the time constant.      Low frequency response: Sensitivity of an EEG channel to relatively low frequencies. Determined by the low frequency response of the amplifier and by the low frequency filter (time constant) used. Expressed as percent reduction in output trace deflection at certain stated low frequencies, relative to other frequencies in the mid-frequency band of the' channel (see low frequency filter, time constant).      Low pass filter: Synonym: high frequency filter.      Low voltage EEG: A waking record characterized by activity of amplitude not greater than 20 uV over all head regions. With appropriate instrumental sensitivities this activity can be shown to be composed primarily of beta, theta and, to a lesser degree, delta waves, with or without alpha activity over the posterior areas.        Comments: (1) low voltage EEGs are susceptible to change under the influence of certain physiological stimuli, sleep, pharmacological agents and pathological processes. (2) They should be clearly distinguished from tracings of electrocerebral inactivity and low voltage fast activity.      Low voltage fast activity: Low voltage fast activity refers to the fast, and often recruiting, activity which can be recorded at the onset of an ictal discharge, particularly in invasive EEG recording of a seizure.      Low voltage fast EEG: Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: low voltage EEG.             Machine, EEG: Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: electroencephalograph.      Map, isopotential: Synonym: diagram of equipotential lines. Graphic display of equipotential lines of a potential. The maximum amplitude of the potential is 100% and the fall-off of the potential is shown in arbitrary steps of, for example, 10% of the maximum amplitude.      Monomorphic: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG patterns.      Monophasic wave: Wave developed on one side of the baseline.      Monopolar: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: referential.      Monorhythmic: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG patterns.      Monorhythmic sinusoidal delta activity: Use of term discouraged (see delta rhythm; frontal (occipital) intermittent rhythmic delta activity).      Montage: The particular arrangement by which a number of derivations are displayed simultaneously in an EEG record.      Morphology: (1) the study of the form of EEG waves. (2) The form of EEG waves.      Multifocal: More than two or more spatially separated foci (see focal, regional, multiregional).      Mu rhythm: Rhythm at 7-11 Hz, composed of arch-shaped waves occurring over the central or centroparietal regions of the scalp during wakefulness. Amplitude varies but is mostly below 50 uV. Blocked or attenuated most clearly by contralateral movement, thought of movement, readiness to move or tactile stimulation. Greek letter: u.        Synonyms: arceau, wicket, comb rhythms (use discouraged).      Multiple spike-and-slow-wave complex: A sequence of two or more spikes associated with one or more slow waves.        Synonym: polyspike-and-slow-wave complex (preferred term).      Multiple spike complex: A sequence of two or more spikes.        Synonym: polyspike complex (preferred term).      Multiregional: Three and more regional foci (see regional).             Nasopharyngeal electrode: Rod electrode introduced through the nose and placed against the nasopharyngeal wall with its tip lying near the body of the sphenoid bone.      Needle electrode: Small needle inserted into the subdermal layer of the scalp.      Neutral electrode: Use of term discouraged.       Term suggested: reference electrode (not a synonym).      Noise, EEG channel: Small fluctuating output of an EEG channel recorded when high sensitivities are used, even if there is no input signal. Measured in microvolts (uV), referenced to the input.      Non-cephalic reference: Reference electrode that is not on the head.      Non-REM sleep: Term summarizing all sleep stages except REM-sleep (see quiet sleep).      Notch filter: A filter that selectively attenuates a very narrow frequency band, thus producing a sharp notch in the frequency response curve of an EEG channel. A 60- (50) Hz notch filter is used to provide attenuation of 60 (50) Hz interference under extremely unfavorable technical conditions, such as, for instance, recordings in intensive care units.      Nyquist theorem: Accurate digital representation of an EEG signal requires that the sampling rate is at least twice the highest frequency of the signal, i.e. a frequency of 50 Hz requires at least a sampling rate of 100 Hz. Comment: sampling at twice Nyquvist frequency ensures only accurate representation of frequency content. Tolerable reproduction of waveforms requires 5 samples per wave for the fastest components present.            Occipital intermittent rhythmic delta activity: Fairly regular or approximately sinusoidal waves, mostly occurring in bursts at 2-3 Hz over the occipital areas of one or both sides of the head.        Abbreviation: OIRDA. Frequently blocked or attenuated by opening the eyes.      Ohmmeter: An instrument used to measure resistance (see electrode resistance).      Organization: The degree to which physiologic EEG rhythms conform to certain ideal characteristics displayed by a majority of subjects in the same age group, without personal or family history of neurologic and psychiatric diseases, or other illnesses that might be associated with dysfunction of the brain.        Comments: (1) the organization of physiologic EEG rhythms progresses from birth to adulthood. (2) Poor organization of EEG rhythms such as the alpha rhythm does not necessarily imply abnormality.      Out-or-phase signals: Two waves of opposite phases (see differential signal; phase reversal) (not a synonym).      Output voltage: The voltage across the writer/trace of an EEG channel.      Overbreathing:        Synonym: hyperventilation.      Overload: Condition caused by applying voltage differences which are larger than the channel is designed for or set to handle to the input terminals of an EEG amplifier. Causes clipping of EEG waves and/or blocking of the amplifier, depending on its magnitude (see clipping, blocking).             Pad electrode: Metal electrode covered with a cotton or felt and gauze pad, held in position by a head cap or harness.      Paper speed: Velocity of movement of EEG paper. Expressed in centimeters per second (cm/s) or millimeters per second (m/s).      Paroxysm: Phenomenon with abrupt onset, rapid attainment of a maximum, and sudden termination; distinguished from background activity.        Comment: commonly used to refer to epileptiform patterns and seizure patterns (see epileptiform pattern, seizure pattern).      Paroxysmal fast: Fast frequencies in the beta range occurring in trains (see paroxysm, low voltage fast activity).      Pattern: Any characteristic EEG activity.?      Peak: Point of maximum amplitude of a wave.       Pen galvanometer: Synonym: pen writer.?      Pen motor: Synonym: pen writer.?      Pen writer: A writer using ink delivered by a pen.        Synonym: pen galvanometer, pen motor.       Period: Duration of complete cycle of individual component of a sequence of regularly repeated EEG waves or complexes.        Comment: the period of the individual components of an EEG rhythm is the reciprocal of the frequency of the rhythm.      Periodic: Applies to: (1) EEG waves or complexes Occurring in a sequence at an approximately regular rate. (2) EEG waves or complexes occurring intermittently at approximately regular intervals, generally of one to several seconds.      Periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges (PLEDs): PLEDs are sharp transients such as sharp waves or spikes, which repeat in a periodical or semiperiodical fashion. They have either a regional or a lateralized distribution. They may also occur independently over both hemispheres. The epileptiform discharges often have multiple phases and a complex morphology. The main component is negative.      Petit mal: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG patterns. Terms suggested, when- ever appropriate: 3 per second spike-and-slow-wave complex, atypical spike-and-slow-wave complex, sharp-and-slow-wave complex.      Petit mal variant: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG patterns. Terms suggested whenever appropriate: atypical spike-and-slow-wave complex, sharp-and-slow-wave complex.      Phantom spike-and-wave: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: 6/s spike-and-slow-wave.      Phantom spike-and-slow-wave: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: 6/s spike-and-slow- wave.      Phase: (1) Time or polarity relationships between a point on a wave displayed in a derivation and the identical point on the same wave recorded simultaneously in another derivation. (2) Time or angular relationships between a point on a wave and the onset of the cycle of the same wave. Usually expressed in degrees or radians.      Phase reversal: Simultaneous trace deflections in opposite directions from two or more channels. Assuming a single generator, a phase reversal is due to the same (or at least similar) signal being simultaneously applied to the input terminal 2 of one differential amplifier and to the input terminal 1 of the other amplifier. Comment: (1) this phenomenon is rarely observed in scalp EEGs, but is common in intracranial recordings. (2) When observed in two linked bipolar derivations, phase reversal indicates that the potential field is maximal or minimal at or near the electrode common to such derivations. In a referential derivation a phase reversal indicates that the reference electrode is neither maximum nor minimum for the signal. (3) A phase reversal in a referential recording, when assessed using mapping of the potential fields, indicates that the source is located beneath the zero potential line at a depth that can be calculated by modeling (see phase reversal, bipolar montage, referential montage, differential amplifier, dipole).      Photic driving: Physiologic response consisting of rhythmic activity elicited over the posterior regions of the head by repetitive photic stimulation at frequencies of about 5-30 Hz. Comments: (1) term should be limited to activity time-locked to the stimulus and of frequency identical or harmonically related to the stimulus frequency. (2) Photic driving should be distinguished from the visual evoked potentials elicited by isolated flashes of light or flashes repeated at very low frequencies.      Photic stimulation: Delivery of intermittent flashes of light to the eyes of a subject. Used as EEG activation procedure.        Synonym: intermittent photic stimulation (IPS).      Photic stimulator: Device for delivering intermittent flashes of light.        Synonym: stroboscope (use discouraged).      Photoconvulsive response:        Synonym: photoparoxysmal response (preferred term).      Photomyoclonic response: Synonym: myogenic response (preferred term).      Photomyogenic response: A response to intermittent photic stimulation characterized by the appearance in the record of brief, repetitive muscular artifacts (spikes) over the anterior regions of the head. These often increase gradually in amplitude as stimuli are continued and cease promptly when the stimulus is withdrawn.        Comment: this response is frequently associated with flutter of the eyelids and vertical oscillations of the eyeballs and sometimes with discrete jerking mostly involving the musculature of the face and head.        Preferred to synonym: photomyoclonic response.      Photoparoxysmal response: Abnormal response to intermittent photic stimulation characterized by spike-and-slow-wave and polyspike-and-slow-wave complexes. Responses are graded from occipital spikes time-locked to the flashes to generalized epileptiform discharges which may outlast the stimulus by a few seconds.        Comment: only the generalized spike-and-wave response shows a strong association with epilepsy, particularly if it is self-sustaining and continues after the stimulus. Preferred to synonym: photoconvulsive response.      Polarity convention: International agreement whereby differential EEG amplifiers are constructed so that negativity at the input termina1 1 relative to the input terminal 2 of the same amplifier produces an upward trace deflection.        Comment: this convention is contrary to that prevailing in some other biological and non-biological fields.      Polarity, EEG wave: Sign of potential difference existing at a given time between an electrode affected by a given potential change and another electrode not appreciably, or less, affected by the same change (see polarity convention).        Comment: the apparent "polarity" of an EEG wave is dependent upon the potential difference between two electrodes.      Polygraphic recording: Simultaneous monitoring of multiple physiological measures such as the EEG, respiration, electrocardiogram, electromyogram, eye movement, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and leg movements, etc.      Polymorphic activity: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG pattern.      Polyphasic wave: Wave consisting of two or more components developed on alternating sides of the baseline (see diphasic wave, triphasic wave).      Polyrhythmic activity: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG pattern.      Polysomnography: Polygraphic recording of sleep (see polygraphic recording).      Polyspike-and-slow-wave complex:        Synonym: multiple spike-and-slow-wave complex (term discouraged) .      Polyspike complex: Synonym: multiple spike complex (term discouraged).      Positive occipital sharp transient of sleep (POSTS): Sharp transient maximal over the occipital regions, positive relative to other areas, apparently occurring spontaneously during sleep. May be single or repetitive. Amplitude varies but is generally below 50 uV.      Positive occipital spike-like wave of sleep: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: positive occipital sharp transient of sleep (POSTS).       Potential: (1) Strictly: voltage. (2) Loosely: synonym of wave.      Potential field: Amplitude distribution of an EEG wave at the surface of the head or cerebral cortex or in the depth of the brain, measured at a given instant in time. Represented in diagrams by equipotential lines (see isopotential map).      Projected patterns: Abnormal EEG activities believed to result from a disturbance at a site remote from the recording electrodes. Description of specific EEG patterns preferred.      Provocation procedure: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: activation.      Pseudoperiodic: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: quasiperiodic.      Psychomotor variant: Use of term discouraged when describing EEG pattern.        Term suggested: rhythmic temporal theta burst of drowsiness,             Quantity: Amount of EEG activity with respect to both number and amplitude of waves.      Quasiperiodic: Applies to EEG waves or complexes that occur at intervals and only approach regularity.             RC coupled amplifier: Abbreviation for resistance-capacitance coupled amplifier.      Reactivity: Susceptibility of individual rhythms or the EEG as a whole to change following sensory stimulation or other physiologic actions.      Record: The end product of the EEG recording process.      Recording:        (1) The process of obtaining an EEG record.        Synonym: tracing.        (2) The end product of the EEG recording process, most commonly traced on paper or digital storage.        Synonyms: record, tracing.      Reference electrode: (1) In general: any electrode against which the potential variations of another electrode are measured. (2) Specifically: a suitable reference electrode is any electrode customarily connected to the input terminal 2 of an EEG amplifier and placed so as to minimize the likelihood of pick-up of the same EEG activity recorded by an exploring electrode, usually connected to the input terminal 1 of the same amplifier, or of other activities.        Comments: (1) Whatever the location of the reference electrode, the possibility that it might be affected by appreciable EEG potentials should always be considered. (2) A reference electrode connected to the input terminal 2 of all or several EEG amplifiers is referred to as a common reference electrode.      Referential derivation: Recording from a pair of electrodes consisting of an exploring electrode generally connected to the input terminal 1 and a reference electrode usually connected to the input terminal 2 of an EEG amplifier (see reference electrode, referential montage, common reference montage).      Referential montage: A montage consisting of referential derivations.        Comment: a referential montage in which the reference electrode is common to multiple derivations is referred to as a common reference montage (see referential derivation).      Reformatting: Transformation of digitized EEG into different montages. Reformatting requires that the raw EEG signal is recorded to a common reference electrode. Only those electrodes can be included in the reformatting montages which are connected to amplifier input 1.?      Regional: EEG activity that is limited to a region of the scalp or recorded in 3 or more electrodes in intracranial recordings (see focal, multiregional).      Regular: Applies to waves or complexes of approximately constant period and relatively uniform appearance.      REM: Rapid eye movements.      REM atonia: Reduction of tonic muscle activity during REM sleep.      REM sleep: Sleep stage characterized by low amplitude mixed frequency EEG activity, episodic bursts of predominantly horizontal rapid eye movements (REM) and reduction of axial tonic muscle activity; frequently associated with dreams; phasic muscle activity, saw-tooth waves and changes in respiration may occur.        Synonym: paradoxical sleep, desynchronized sleep, dream sleep (use of terms discouraged) (see active sleep, non-REM sleep).      Resistance-capacitance coupled amplifier: An amplifier in which successive stages are connected (coupled) by networks consisting of capacitors and resistors.        Abbreviation: RC coupled amplifier.      Resolution: The resolution of an AD converter (see digital EEG) is specified in binary digits or "bits". For example, a dynamic range of ± 1023 uV (a total span of 2046 uV), converted at 12-bit resolution, will allow the digitized signal to take on values every 0.5 uV.      Rhythm: EEG activity consisting of waves of approximately constant period.      Rhythm en arceau: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: mu (u) rhythm.      Rhythm of alpha frequency: (1) In general: any rhythm in the alpha band. (2) Specifically: term should be used to designate those activities in the alpha band which differ from the alpha rhythm as regards their topography and/or reactivity and do not have specific appellations (such as mu rhythm) (see alpha rhythm).      Rhythmic temporal theta burst of drowsiness: Characteristic burst of 4-7 Hz waves frequently notched by faster waves, occurring over the temporal regions of the head during drowsiness. Synonym: psychomotor variant pattern (use discouraged). Comment: this is a pattern of drowsiness that is of no clinical significance.      Run: Colloquialism. Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: montage.             Saw-toothed bursts: Temporal sharp transients in preterm infants occurring in burst of 3-8 sharp, rhythmic waves at 4-8 Hz, often with high voltage (100-200 uV).        Synonym: premature temporal theta.      Saw-tooth waves: Vertex negative 2-5 Hz waves occurring in series during REM sleep.      Scalp electrode: Electrode held against, attached to, or inserted in the scalp.      Scalp electroencephalogram: Record of electrical activity of the brain by means of electrodes placed on the surface of the head. The term should be used only to distinguish between scalp and other electroencephalograms such as depth electroencephalograms. In all other instances, a scalp electroencephalogram should be referred to simply as an electroencephalogram (EEG).      Scalp electroencephalography: Technique of recording scalp electroencephalograms. Term should be used only to distinguish between this and other recording techniques such as depth electroencephalography. In all other instances scalp electroencephalography should be referred to simply as electroencephalography (EEG).      Secondary bilateral synchrony:        Synonym:?secondary generalization. Spreading of an initially?focal (regional) epileptiform discharge to become?generalized.        Comment: secondary bilateral?synchrony frequently occurs from midline frontal?generators.      SEEG: Abbreviation for stereotactic (stereotaxic) depth electroencephalogram and electroencephalography.      Seizure pattern, EEG: Phenomenon consisting?of repetitive EEG discharges with relatively abrupt?onset and termination and characteristic pattern of?evolution lasting at least several seconds. These EEG patterns are seen during epileptic seizures. Frequent interictal epileptiform discharges are a usually not associated with clinical seizures and thus should be differentiated from electroencephalographic seizure patterns. The component waves or complexes vary in form, frequency, and topography. They are generally rhythmic and frequently display increasing amplitude and decreasing frequency during the same episode. When focal in?onset, they tend to spread subsequently to other areas.        Comment: EEG seizure patterns unaccompanied by clinical epileptic manifestations detected by the EEG technician should be referred to as?"subclinical" .      Sensitivity: Ratio of input voltage to output trace deflection in an EEG channel. Sensitivity is?measured in microvolts per millimeter (uV/mm).        Example:       Sensitivity        = (input voltage)/(output trace deflection)       = 50uV/10mm       =5 uV/mm      Sharp wave: A transient, clearly distinguished from background activity, with pointed peak at a conventional paper speed or time scale and duration of 70-200 ms, i.e. over 1/4-1/5 s approximately. Main component is generally negative relative to other areas. Amplitude varies.        Comments: (1) term should be restricted to epileptiform discharges and does not apply to (a) distinctive physiologic events such as vertex sharp transients, lambda waves and positive occipital sharp transients of sleep, (b) sharp transients poorly distinguished from background activity and sharp-appearing individual waves of EEG rhythms. (2) Sharp waves should be differentiated from spikes, i.e. transients having similar characteristics but shorter duration. However, it should be kept in mind that this distinction is largely arbitrary and primarily serves descriptive purposes. As a rule, in ink-written EEG records taken at 3 cm/s, sharp waves occupy more than 2 mm of paper width and spikes 2 mm or less (see spike).      Sharp-and-slow-wave complex: A sequence of a sharp wave and a slow wave.        Comment: hyphenation facilitates use of term in plural form: sharp- and-slow-wave complexes or sharp-and-slow- waves.      Sigma rhythm: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: sleep spindles.      Silence, record of electrocerebral: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: record of electrocerebral inactivity.Simultaneous: Occurring at the same time. Synonym: synchronous.      Sine wave: Wave having the form of a sine curve.      Single-ended amplifier: An amplifier that operates on signals that are asymmetric with respect to ground.      Sinusoidal: Term applies to EEG waves resembling sine waves.      Six Hz spike-and-slow-wave: Spike-and-slow-wave complexes at 4-7 Hz, but mostly at 6 Hz occurring generally in brief bursts bilaterally and synchronously, symmetrically or asymmetrically, and either confined to or of larger amplitude over the posterior or anterior regions of the head. Amplitude varies but is generally smaller than that of spike-and-slow-wave complexes repeating at slower rates.        Comment: this pattern is of little clinical significance and should be distinguished from epileptiform discharges.      Sleep onset REM (SOREM): Sleep onset REM means the occurrence of REM less than 15 min after falling asleep.      Sleep spindle: Burst at 11-15 Hz but mostly at 12-14 Hz generally diffuse but of higher voltage over the central regions of the head, occurring during sleep. Amplitude varies but is mostly below 50 pV in the adult.        Synonym: sigma rhythm (use discouraged).      Sleep stages: Distinctive phases of sleep best demonstrated by polygraphic recordings of the EEG and other variables, including at least eye movements and activity of certain voluntary muscles.        Comment: classified by various systems (Dement and Kleitman 1957; Rechtschaffen and Kales 1968).      Slow alpha variant rhythms: Characteristic rhythms mostly at 4-5 Hz, recorded most prominently over the posterior regions of the head. Generally alternate, or are intermixed, with alpha rhythm to which they often are harmonically related. Amplitude varies but is frequently close to 50 uV. Blocked or attenuated by attention, especially visual, and mental effort.        Comment: slow alpha variant rhythms should be distinguished from posterior slow waves characteristic of children and adolescents and occasionally seen in young adults.      Slow activity: Activity of frequency lower than alpha, i.e. theta and delta activities.      Slow spike: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: sharp wave.      Slow spike-and-wave complex: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: sharp-and-slow-wave complex.      Slow wave: Wave with duration longer than alpha waves, i.e. over 1/8 s.      Small sharp spikes: Abbreviation: SSS. Synonym for benign epileptiform transients of sleep (BETS) (preferred term).      Special electrode: Any electrode other than standard scalp electrode (see closely spaced electrodes; ten-ten system).      Sphenoidal electrode: Needle or wire electrode inserted through the soft tissues of the face below the zygomatic arch so that its tip lies near the base of the skull in the region of the foramen ovale.      Spike: A transient, clearly distinguished from background activity, with pointed peak at a conventional paper speed or time scale and a duration from 20 to under 70 ms, i.e. 1/50-1/15 s, approximately. Main component is generally negative relative to other areas. Amplitude varies.        Comments: (1) term should be restricted to epileptiform discharges. EEG spikes should be differentiated from sharp waves, i.e. transients having similar characteristics but longer durations. However, it should be kept in mind that this distinction is largely arbitrary and primarily serves descriptive purposes. Generally, in ink-written EEG records taken at 3 cm/s, spikes occupy 2 mm or less of paper width and sharp waves more than 2 mm. (2) EEG spikes should be clearly distinguished from the brief unit spikes recorded from single cells with microelectrode techniques (see sharp wave).      Spike-and-dome complex: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: spike-and-slow-wave complex.      Spike-and-slow-wave complex: A pattern?consisting of a spike followed by a slow wave.        Comment: hyphenation facilitates use of term in plural form: spike-and-slow-wave complexes.      Spike-and-slow-wave rhythm: Use of term discouraged. Terms suggested, whenever appropriate: 3 per second spike-and-slow-wave complex, atypical spike-and-slow wave complex, sharp-and-slow-wave complex.      Spindle: Group of rhythmic waves characterized by a progressively increasing, then gradually decreasing, amplitude (see sleep spindle).      Spread: Propagation of EEG waves from one region of the scalp and/or brain to another (see generalization).      Standard electrode: Conventional scalp electrode (see disk electrode, needle electrode, pad electrode, special electrode).      Standard electrode placement: Scalp electrode location(s) determined by the ten-twenty system (see ten-twenty system).      Status epilepticus, EEG: The occurrence of virtually continuous or repetitive seizure activity in an EEG.  Term should be distinguished from clinical status epilepticus.      Stephenson-Gibbs reference: Use of term discouraged.         Term suggested: sterno-spinal reference electrode.      Stereotactic (stereotaxic) electroencephalogram: Abbreviation: SEEG. Intracerebral EEG?recordings using electrodes implanted stereotactically, thus permitting the calculation of electrode?coordinates that can be projected on a stereotactic?brain atlas. The abbreviation SDEEG is also acceptable for stereotactic depth electroencephalogram.      Stereotactic (stereotaxic) electroencephalography: Technique of recording stereotactic in (stereotaxic) electroencephalograms.        Abbreviation: SEEG.      Sternospinal reference: A non-cephalic reference achieved by interconnecting two electrodes placed over the right sterno-clavicular junction and the spine of the seventh cervical vertebra, respectively, and balancing the voltage between them by means of a potentiometer to reduce ECG artifact.      Stickon electrode: Colloquialism. Use of term sc: discouraged. Term suggested: disk electrode.       Subclinical rhythmical discharges of adults (SREDA): This is a rhythmic pattern seen in the?adult age group which consists of a mixture of frequencies, often predominant in the theta range.? It may resemble a seizure discharge but is not  accompanied by any clinical signs or symptoms. ?The significance of this pattern is uncertain, but it?should be distinguished from an epileptic seizure pattern.      Subdural electrode: Electrode inserted under the dural covering of the cerebrum.      Suppression: EEG records showing activity below 10 /uV (reference derivation) are termed background suppression (see burst suppression pattern).      Symmetry: (1) Approximately equal amplitude, frequency and form of EEG activities over homologous areas on opposite sides of the head. (2) Approximately equal distribution of potentials of unlike polarity on either side of a zero isopotential axis (see phase reversal). (3) Approximately equal distribution of EEG waves about the baseline.      Synchrony: The simultaneous occurrence of EEG waves over regions on the same or opposite sides of the head.  Comment: term simultaneous only implies a lack of delay that is measurable with ink writers at customary paper speeds or with standard computer display.             Ten-ten system: System of standardized scalp electrode placement. According to this system, additional scalp electrodes are placed at half distance between the standard electrodes of the ten-twenty system (see ten-twenty system, closely spaced electrodes).        Comment: use of additional, supplementary scalp electrodes is indicated for instance during epilepsy monitoring to better localize epileptiform discharges.      Ten-twenty system: System of standardized scalp electrode placement recommended by the International Federation of Societies for Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology. According to this system, the placements of electrodes is determined by measuring the head from external landmarks and taking 10 or 20% of these measurements.        Comment: the use of additional scalp electrodes, such as anterior temporal electrodes, is indicated in various circumstances (epilepsy monitoring).      Theta band: Frequency band from 4 to under 8 Hz. Greek letter: <theta>.      Theta rhythm: Rhythm with a frequency of 4 to under 8 Hz.      Theta wave: Wave with duration of 1/4 to over 1/8 s.      Three Hz spike-and-slow-wave complex: See 3 per second spike-and-slow-wave complex.      Three per second spike-and-slow-wave complex: Characteristic paroxysm consisting of a regular sequence of spike-and-slow-wave complexes which: (1) repeat at 33.5 c/s (measured during the first few seconds of the paroxysm), (2) are bilateral in their onset and termination, generalized, and usually of maximal amplitude over the frontal areas, (3) are approximately synchronous and symmetrical on the two sides of the head throughout the paroxysm. Amplitude varies but can reach values of 1000 uV (1 mV) (see atypical spike-and-slow-wave complex).      Time constant, EEG channel: The product of the values of the resistance (in mega-ohms, M<Ohms>) and the capacitance (in microfarads, uF) which make up the time constant control of an EEG channel. This product represents the time required for the trace to fall to 37% of the deflection initially produced when a DC voltage difference is applied to the input terminals of the amplifier. Expressed in seconds (s).        Abbreviation: TC.        Comment: for a simple RC coupling network, the TC is related to the percent reduction in sensitivity of the channel at a given stated low frequency by the equation TC = ?<pi>f, where f is the frequency at which a 30% (3 dB) attenuation occurs. For instance, for a TC of 0.3 s, an attenuation of 30% (3 dB) occurs at 0.5 Hz. Thus, either the time constant or the percent attenuation at a given stated low frequency can be used to designate the same position of the low frequency filter of the EEG channel (see low frequency filter).      Topography: Spatial distribution of EEG features (voltage fields, spectra, etc.) over the scalp or cerebral cortex.      Trace alternant: A discontinuous pattern of non-REM (quiet) sleep seen in preterm infants of 34 weeks conceptional age or older which can persist up to 3-4 weeks after birth in full term infants. The pattern is characterized by bursts of predominantly slow waves (1-3 Hz, 50-100 uV) appearing approximately every 4-5 s, and inter- vening periods of low voltage activity of (<50 uV) 4-7 Hz.      Trace continu: Continuous activity, replacing a previously markedly intermittent record during evolution of EEG in preterm infants.      Trace discontinue: Pattern of preterm infants below 34 weeks of conceptional age (CA) characterized by mixed frequency high voltage bursts separated by periods of a very low voltage back- ground.      Tracing: Synonyms: record, recording.      Transient, EEG: Any isolated wave or complex, distinguished from background activity.      Transverse bipolar montage: Synonym: coronal bipolar montage.      Triangular bipolar montage: A montage consisting of derivations from pairs of electrodes in a group of 3 electrodes arranged in a triangular pattern. Use of this montage is discouraged, because false lateralization may occur.      Triphasic wave: High-amplitude (over 70 uV) positive sharp transients, which are preceded and followed by relatively low-amplitude negative waves. The first negative wave generally has a lower amplitude than the negative afterwave. The distribution is generalized, and frequently the largest deflections in a bipolar fronto-occipital derivation occur at the frontal electrodes. Triphasic waves tend to have a repetition rate of ca. 1-2 Hz.             Unilateral: Confined to one side of the head.        Comments: (1) unilateral EEG activities may be regional or lateralized to one hemisphere. (2) They are said to be lateralized to the right or left side of the head.      Unipolar: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: referential.      Unipolar derivation: Use of term discouraged (see referential derivation).      Unipolar depth electrode: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: single-electrode lead.      Unipolar montage: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: referential montage.            Vertex sharp transient: Sharp potential, maximal at the vertex, negative relative to other areas, apparently occurring spontaneously during sleep or in response to a sensory stimulus during sleep or wakefulness. May be single or repetitive. Amplitude varies but rarely exceeds 250 uV .        Abbreviation: V wave (see K complex).      Vertex sharp wave: Use of term discouraged when describing physiologic vertex sharp transient.       Voltage: Derived by multiplying trace amplitude times display or pen output sensitivity (see amplitude).      Volume conduction: Through the process of volume conduction, electrical activity originates from a generator and spreads through a conductive medium to be picked up by a distant recording electrode. Volume conduction is passive and is picked up synchronously at all recording electrodes at the speed of light.      V wave: Abbreviation for vertex sharp transient.            Wave: Any change of the potential difference between pairs of electrodes in EEG recording.  May arise in the brain (EEG wave) or outside it (extracerebral potential).      Wave form (waveform): The shape of an EEG wave.      White lead: Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: input terminal 2.      Wicket rhythm: Use of term discouraged. Term suggested: mu rhythm.      Wicket spikes: Spike-like monophasic negative single waves or trains of waves occurring over the temporal regions during drowsiness that have an arcuate or mu-like appearance. These are mainly seen in older individuals and represent a benign variant that is of little clinical significance.      Writer. System for direct write-out of the output of an EEG channel. Most writers use ink delivered by a pen. In certain instruments, the ink is sprayed as in a jet stream. In other recorders the pen writer uses carbon paper instead of ink. Laser printers are also used in digital EEG.             Zero potential reference electrode: Use of term discouraged.        Term suggested: reference electrode (not a synonym.       
ReferencesBrazier, M.A.B., Cobb, W.A., Fischgold, H., Gastaut, H., Gloor, P., Hess, R., Jasper, H., Loeb, C., Magnus, O., Pampiglione, G., Remand, A., Storm van Leeuwen, W., Grey, W. Preliminary proposal for an EEG terminology by the terminology committee of the International Federation for Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology. Electroenceph. clin. Neurophysiol., 1961, 13: 646-650.Chatrian, G.E., Bergamini, L., Dondey, M., Klass, D.W., Lennox- Buchthal, M., Petersen, 1. A glossary of terms most commonly used by clinical electroencephalographers. Electroenceph. din. Neurophysiol., 1974,37: 538-548.Dement, W. and Kleitman, N. The relation of eye movements during sleep to dream activity: an objective method for the study of dreaming. J. Exp. Psychol., 1957, 53: 339-346.Rechtschaffen, A. and Kales, A. A Manual of Standardized Terminology, Techniques and Scoring System for Sleep Stages of Human Subjects. Brain lnfonnation Service/Brain Research Institute, Los Angeles, CA, 1968.Appendix A. Proposal for an EEG report formINFORMATION PROVIDED BY THE REFERRING PHYSICIANPatient IDAgeHistoryDiagnosisNeurological conditionMedicationLast seizureClinical questionINFORMATION PROVIDED BY THE EEG TECHNICIANEEG IDHour and date of recordingLevel of consciousness, vigilance; cooperation of the patientActivation procedures (photic stimulation, hyperventilation, mental activation, sensory, stimuli, etc)EEG DESCRIPTION (USE THE TERMS OF THE GLOSSARY)Use of special electrodes/recording conditionWakeSleepComa/stuporBackground activitySlow activityEpileptiform activitySpecial EEG patternsEffect of activation proceduresEEG INTERPRETATIONinterpretation of the EEG results in light of the diagnosis and questions of the referring physician (clinical significance of the results, prognosis, etc). use common clinical terminology, no special EEG terms