Diagnosis and management of epilepsies in children and young people?A national clinical guideline1  Introduction 1 2  Diagnosis 3 3  Investigative procedures 6 4  Management 11 5  Antiepileptic drug treatment 15 6  Management of prolonged or serial seizures?and convulsive status epilepticus 217  Behaviour and learning 238  Models of care 259  Development of the guideline 2710  Implementation and audit 3111 Annexes 3412 Abbreviations 4713 References 48March 2005COPIES OF ALL SIGN GUIDELINES ARE AVAILABLE ONLINE AT WWW.SIGN.AC.UK
KEY TO EVIDENCE STATEMENTS AND GRADES OF RECOMMENDATIONSLEVELS OF EVIDENCE1++High quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials (RCTs), or RCTs with a very low risk of bias1+Well conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs, or RCTs with a low risk of bias1-Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs, or RCTs with a high risk of bias2++High quality systematic reviews of case control or cohort studies?High quality case control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding or bias and a high probability that the relationship is causal2+Well conducted case control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding or bias and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal2-Case control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding or bias and a significant risk that the relationship is not causal3Non-analytic studies, eg case reports, case series4Expert opinionGRADES OF RECOMMENDATIONNote: The grade of recommendation relates to the strength of the evidence on which the recommendation is based. It does not reflect the clinical importance of the recommendation.AAt least one meta-analysis, systematic review of RCTs, or RCT rated as 1++ and directly applicable to the target population; orA body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated as 1+, directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of resultsBA body of evidence including studies rated as 2++, directly applicable to the target population, and demonstrating overall consistency of results; orExtrapolated evidence from studies rated as 1++ or 1+?CA body of evidence including studies rated as 2+, directly applicable to the target population and demonstrating overall consistency of results; orExtrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2++DEvidence level 3 or 4; or?Extrapolated evidence from studies rated as 2+GOOD PRACTICE POINTSRecommended best practice based on the clinical experience of the guideline development group©?Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network ISBN 1 899893 24 5?First published 2005SIGN consents to the photocopying of this guideline for the purpose of implementation in NHSScotlandScottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network Royal College of Physicians?9 Queen Street, Edinburgh EH2 1JQwww.sign.ac.ukThis document is produced from elemental chlorine-free material and is sourced from sustainable forests1 
INTRODUCTION1.1 THE NEED FOR A GUIDELINEEpilepsy is one of the commonest chronic neurological conditions of childhood. In Scotland there  are  5,000  to  7,000  children  and  young  people  with “active” epilepsy  and  820  new principal diagnoses of epilepsy were made in 2003.1,2 Seventy per cent of people who develop epilepsy do so in the first two decades of life. Serial seizures and status epilepticus are common in childhood; 40% of status epilepticus occurs in children under two years of age3 and 75% of status epilepticus is the first seizure presentation in a child.4 Both the condition, and its treatment, carry significant morbidity. ?The diagnosis of epilepsy is often straightforward but, on occasion, immensely difficult. There is a wide differential diagnosis in assessing whether a seizure is epileptic or non-epileptic and this is particularly the case for children and young people. Misdiagnosis is a significant problem and there has also been much debate in the literature regarding the appropriate investigation of epileptic seizures. The evidence base for these topics is reviewed in this guideline. ?The epilepsies are a heterogeneous group of childhood conditions that have differing diagnostic criteria,  management  and  widely  differing  outcomes.  It  is  important  to  identify  the  specific epilepsy syndrome wherever possible to refine the choice of medication to maximise benefit and minimise adverse effects. Children and their parents deserve information appropriate to their particular type of epilepsy. ?There has been a substantial increase in the number of available antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), many  of  which  have  no  current  marketing  licence  (ie  which  are  “unlicensed”),  making  the choice of an appropriate AED more complex. This issue is further discussed in section 5 and Annex 4. ?Teenagers with epilepsy are a group who very often have particular needs not well addressed by  more  traditional  paediatric  and  adult  services.  Some  of  these  issues  have  already  been raised in the sister publication SIGN 70: Diagnosis and Management of Epilepsy in Adults5 and the guideline development group gratefully acknowledges the work of that group, upon which this guideline draws, where relevant. ?The guideline is aimed at healthcare professionals involved in the diagnosis and management of the epilepsies of childhood, and it is hoped that it will also be used by children and their families. It tries to reflect the issues often raised by families, for example, with a section on learning and behaviour in children who have epilepsy. 1.2 REMIT OF THE GUIDELINE ?This is an evidence based guideline covering the diagnosis and management of the epilepsies of children and young people aged from one month to 19 years of age (remaining in secondary education). The terms “children” or “child” are used throughout the guideline to cover the age band indicated above, except where there are issues specific to young people. ?The guideline does not cover seizures in newborn babies, infants under one month of age, the management of non-epileptic seizures nor surgical or other specialised treatment for intractable seizures.  Issues  relating  to  contraception  and  reproduction  have  been  covered  in  the  adult guideline.5 ?Throughout this guideline reference has been made to seizures (synonymous with fit, turn and attack). It is important to emphasize that a seizure may be epileptic or non-epileptic. A convulsion or convulsive seizure refers to a particular type of seizure involving motor movements and this again may be epileptic or non-epileptic. A glossary appears in Annex 6.1.3 DEFINITIONS ?Epilepsy is defined as a condition characterised by recurrent epileptic seizures. An epileptic seizure is a clinical manifestation presumed to result from an abnormal and excessive discharge of a set of neurones in the brain.6 Epileptic seizures are categorised as either focal or generalised. ?Focal (previously “partial”) epileptic seizures arise in specific loci in one part of the cerebral cortex  that  carry  with  them  identifiable  clinical  features  either  subjective  or  observed. Consciousness may or may not be retained or there may be partial loss of awareness. ?Generalised  epileptic  seizures  involve  large  areas  of  brain  from  the  outset,  usually  both hemispheres,  and  are  associated  with  early  impairment  of  consciousness.  They  range  from absences characterised only by impairment of consciousness, to generalised tonic-clonic seizures in which widespread convulsive activity takes place. Myoclonic, tonic and clonic seizures are all types of generalised seizures. ?Epileptic syndromes have been defined by the commission on Classification and Terminology of the International League against Epilepsy as: “A complex of signs and symptoms that define a unique epilepsy condition. This must involve more than just the seizure type; thus frontal lobe seizures per se, for instance, do not constitute a syndrome”.7 ?The classification of epilepsies and epilepsy syndromes has important practical implications when devising individual treatment plans and giving appropriate information to children and families. The likelihood of arriving at an epilepsy syndrome diagnosis is very much more likely in  children  than  in  adults.8  This  classification  is  presently  undergoing  a  major  review  (see Annex 1 for a list of some common epileptic syndromes in childhood).1.4 STATEMENT OF INTENT ?This guideline is not intended to be construed or to serve as a standard of care. Standards of care are determined on the basis of all clinical data available for an individual case and are subject to change as scientific knowledge and technology advance and patterns of care evolve. Adherence to guideline recommendations will not ensure a successful outcome in every case, nor  should  they  be  construed  as  including  all  proper  methods  of  care  or  excluding  other acceptable methods of care aimed at the same results. The ultimate judgement must be made by  the  appropriate  healthcare  professional(s)  responsible  for  clinical  decisions  regarding  a particular  clinical  procedure  or  treatment  plan.  This  judgement  should  only  be  arrived  at following  discussion  of  the  options  with  the  patient,  covering  the  diagnostic  and  treatment choices available. However, it is advised that significant departures from the national guideline or any local guidelines derived from it should be fully documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken. 1.5 REVIEW AND UPDATING ?This  guideline  was  issued  in  2005  and  will  be  considered  for  review  in  three  years.  Any updates  to  the  guideline  in  the  interim  period  will  be  noted  on  the  SIGN  website: www.sign.ac.uk2 
DIAGNOSIS2.1 INITIAL MANAGEMENT OF THE CHILD WITH A FIRST SEIZURE IN PRIMARY CARE OR ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTMany children with a first seizure, and in whom there will be a range of possible diagnoses, will  present  to  their  general  practitioner  (GP)  or  to  an  accident  and  emergency  department (A&E). Five per cent of medical paediatric accident and emergency attendances follow a seizure.9 Only a minority of such patients turn out to have epilepsy. A first seizure is extremely stressful for the family. Parents witnessing the event often believe their child is dying.10Children are often febrile at the time of a first seizure. This may be a febrile seizure, but there is an important group of children whose apparent febrile seizure is due to bacterial meningitis or other central nervous system infection, and for whom early recognition and treatment is required.11 Children without a fever may have had a non-epileptic event, an unprovoked epileptic seizure or an acute symptomatic seizure, the latter requiring urgent investigation and treatment.2.1.1 MANAGEMENT  OF  THE  CHILD  WHOSE  CONSCIOUS  LEVEL  IS  DEPRESSED,  EITHER  IN THE COURSE OF A SEIZURE OR DURING RECOVERY* “Airway, breathing and circulation” should be preserved according to established paediatric life support guidelines.12* The seizure should be terminated promptly. Management of continuing seizure activity is discussed in section 6.* The possible occurrence of an acute precipitating event should be established. Blood glucose should  be  checked  (near-patient  testing  is  preferable  to  blood  analysis  to  ensure  that hypoglycaemia is recognised and treated promptly). The clinician should be aware of the signs and symptoms of meningitis, other intracranial infection or covert injury and maintain a  high  index  of  suspicion,  especially  if  recovery  does  not  ensue  rapidly.  In  some circumstances, urgent brain imaging may be indicated to identify other underlying causes.2.1.2 MANAGEMENT OF THE FULLY RECOVERED CHILD* It is not necessary to check full blood count, electrolytes, calcium or magnesium unless there are specific features on history and examination to suggest this might be helpful.11* Following complete recovery from a brief non-focal seizure, and in the absence of intercurrent signs and symptoms, hospital admission for observation/investigation is not required. Criteria for admission from A&E to an acute care paediatric unit, developed using a formal consensus process, are listed in Table 1.11[1]   Table 1. Criteria for admission to an acute care paediatric unitCategoryCriteria for admissionAge?Neurology Raised intracranial pressure Generally unwell?Meningism Signs of respiratory aspiration High parent or carer anxietyComplex seizure<1 year Glasgow Coma Scale <15 one hour after seizure papilloedema, tense fontanelle irritable, disinterested, vomiting Kernig’s sign positive, photophobia, neck stiffness respiratory distress, need for oxygen parents/carers feel unhappy to take the child home following a full discussionprolonged (ie >15 minutes), or focal, or recurrentWhere a preliminary diagnosis of epilepsy has been made, subsequent investigations should follow the recommendations in section 3.Information appropriate to the situation should be given to the child and carers. This might include discussion on risk of recurrence, what action should be taken in the event of a further seizure  and  appropriate  reassurance  about  the  nature  of  febrile  seizures.  Where  there  is diagnostic uncertainty, possible causes and the interim management should be discussed.2.2 WHO SHOULD MAKE THE DIAGNOSIS?The accurate diagnosis of one of the epilepsies of childhood can be very difficult. The differential diagnosis  of  a  paroxysmal  event  in  childhood  is  extensive  and  non-epileptic  seizures  are common. In a birth cohort long term follow up study at 11 years, nearly 7% of children had a history of seizures or other episodes of loss of consciousness. Two per cent had a history of febrile convulsions and in a similar number the diagnosis of epilepsy was refuted.13 There are many features, commonly thought to be unique to epileptic seizures, which may also be found in non-epileptic events.14The misdiagnosis of epilepsy is recognised as a diagnostic pitfall and may occur frequently.15 Almost half of the children referred to a tertiary paediatric neurologist with a suggested diagnosis?of  epilepsy  did  not  have  that  condition,16 and  in  children  referred  with  apparently  poorly controlled epilepsy, misdiagnosis rates varied from 12% to 23%,17,18 with syncopal seizures accounting for almost half of these diagnoses, behavioural disorder for 20% and breath-holding for 11%. Others included migraine and night terrors.19 Non-epileptic seizures may also occur in  treated  patients  with  epilepsy.  In  a  large  video  electroencephalogram  (EEG)  series  of paroxysmal  events  in  children,  half  of  the  recorded  events  were  shown  to  be  non-epileptic although 40% of these children also had epilepsy.20[2]In the Dutch study of epilepsy in childhood, four experienced paediatric neurologists classified the first event as “unclear” in 24% of children.21 In over 400 children with multiple events thought to be epileptic the false-positive diagnosis rate was nearly 5%. By contrast, only 7 of 124 children with multiple unclear episodes at intake later received a diagnosis of epilepsy.The misdiagnosis of epilepsy has significant implications for the iatrogenic adverse effects of medication and adverse psychosocial impact. The inappropriate treatment of young pregnant women  with  antiepileptic  medication  risks  subsequent  damage  to  an  unborn  child.  The misdiagnosis  of  a  cardiogenic  syncope,  such  as  one  of  the  prolonged  QT  syndromes,  may result in an otherwise preventable death.Given these concerns regarding misdiagnosis, the breadth of epilepsy syndromes and the range of differential diagnoses, a service for children with epilepsy should have specialists with skills and interest in the management of epilepsy and other paroxysmal disorders. The history taking skills required to ascertain comprehensive witness accounts of events are built upon through training, continuing education and experience. They can be acquired only with an understanding of the range and complexity of the differential diagnosis that exists in children.22[3]D The diagnosis of epilepsy should be made by a paediatric neurologist or paediatrician with expertise in childhood epilepsy.2.3 HISTORY TAKING AND CLINICAL FEATURESObtaining an accurate description of an event may be difficult.23  A study of the accuracy of seizure descriptions by carers showed that only 44% accurately recalled the event.24  As 75% of families fear their child is dying during a first witnessed convulsive seizure,10 it is reasonable to suppose that their history of the seizure may be poor. It is often helpful to obtain multiple witness accounts.    [4]Important features to consider when taking a history are:* what was the child doing and what happened just before and at the time the seizure started?* were there any symptoms suggestive of an aura and what were they?* what was the sequence and timing of events and seizure components?* what happened as the seizure ended?* what was the child like after the seizure and for how long? n was there:o awareness during the evento unresponsivenesso staringo open or closed eyeso eyelid flutter\eyeball jerking or deviation (note direction)o facial twitchingo body stiffnesso chaotic jerking of limbso rhythmic jerking of limbso pallor or cyanosiso any other autonomic features?* if more than one seizure was witnessed how similar were they? Staring or blank spells, particularly in children with learning difficulties, often cause diagnostic difficulty. Key historical features will help select those seizures likely to be non-epileptic. Factors more likely to be indicative of non-epileptic staring include:* staring interrupted by voice or touch* staring associated with rocking* staring initially noticed by a professional carer rather than the family.Factors more likely to be indicative of epileptic staring include:25,26* short, frequent (daily) events* interruption of play and speech* automatisms* association with up-gaze and/or urinary incontinence.There can be appropriate diagnostic uncertainty, particularly after a first seizure. A false negative diagnosis of epilepsy is probably less harmful than a false positive diagnosis. It is appropriate to share the uncertainty surrounding diagnosis and the importance of making a correct diagnosis with the child and family until a definite diagnosis is made.A list of non-epileptic paroxysmal disorders seen at different ages in childhood is shown in Annex 2.D An accurate history of the event should be taken from first-hand witnesses and the child.
3 Investigative procedures3.1  ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHYChildren with convulsive seizures may have syncope (including cardiogenic syncope, such as a prolonged QT syndrome). A standard 12 lead electrocardiogram (ECG) is a simple, inexpensive, readily  available  technique  which  may  allow  a  diagnosis  of  a  cardiac  arrhythmia.    More specialised ECG monitoring techniques such as 24 hour recording and loop recording may be required should a cardiac abnormality be considered clinically likely. This might be achieved through  a  formal  paediatric  cardiac  consultation.  Details  of  how  to  calculate  corrected  QT interval (QTc) are given in Annex 3. ?? All children presenting with convulsive seizures should have an ECG with a calculation of the QTc interval. 3.2  HOME VIDEO RECORDINGHome video camera recordings may reveal information not elicited by history taking and may support or refute a suspected diagnosis of epilepsy.27,28 Home  video  camera  recordings  should  be  used  in  order  to  capture  recurrent  events where the diagnosis is in doubt.3.3 ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHYThere are international consensus guidelines for recording and reporting EEGs in children.29  Particular care is required in interpretation of the paediatric EEG. Overinterpretation of normal variants as epileptiform abnormalities is a recognised pitfall in adult recordings.30,31Age specific patterns may be misinterpreted as epileptiform discharges. The sensitivity of interictal EEG recordings is too low to be a reliable diagnostic test for epilepsy.21,32 Around 40% of children with seizures will have a normal record on a first standard EEG recording.21,33-35 Even with  expert  clinical  evaluation  and  repeated  recordings,  the  sensitivity  of  EEG  is  only  56% after a single event and 70% after multiple events, with a specificity of 78%.21The EEG may show paroxysmal activity or background changes in up to 32% of normal children that could be misinterpreted as abnormal.36 Epileptiform abnormalities are seen in up to 5% of normal children.37-39  These  rates  are  higher  where  there  are  pre-existing  neurological abnormalities.40,41 The rates of EEG abnormality may be further increased during the course of a sleep EEG recording and this may be a pitfall in children who do not have epilepsy.42An EEG recording should not be done indiscriminately to confirm or refute a diagnosis of an epileptic seizure since this will increase the risk of an erroneous diagnosis.D An EEG should only be requested after careful clinical evaluation by someone with expertise in childhood epilepsy.The  recording  and  interpretation  of  a  paediatric  EEG  should  be  undertaken  by  a department familiar with childhood EEG and epilepsy.3.3.1 STANDARD EEG        A standard EEG is often a valuable tool in children with epileptic seizures. It contributes to:* identification of features of a focal or of a generalised epilepsy* syndromic diagnosis* choice of further investigation* the therapeutic management of epilepsy* prognosis of epilepsy.The yield of EEG abnormalities adding to syndromic diagnosis is further increased when the EEG is performed within the first 24 hours of an epileptic seizure.33,35,40C All children with recurrent epileptic seizures should have an EEG. An early recording may avoid the need for repeated EEG investigations.The choice of when to use EEG in children with seizures is often unclear. Among the most commonly  asked  questions  on  this  topic  are  whether  to  use  EEG  after  a  first,  unprovoked seizure, the use of EEG in children with recurrent or complex febrile seizures and the timing of EEG with respect to starting antiepileptic medication. These are discussed further in boxes 1-3 below.       Box 1 – The issue of a first, unprovoked convulsive epileptic seizureThe role of a standard inter-ictal EEG recording when a confident clinical diagnosis has been made is controversial. Those that support performing an EEG cite that useful information can be given to families regarding recurrence risk — an abnormal EEG doubles recurrence risk;44 that information may contribute towards a decision to undertake neuroimaging;33 that it may uncover a previously unrecognised epilepsy or provoking factors (such as photosensitivity); and it may be possible to reach a syndromic diagnosis.Those against performing an EEG after a first unprovoked epileptic seizure argue that epilepsy should  not  be  diagnosed  after  a  first  seizure  and  the  likelihood  of  identifying  an  important intracranial  abnormality  in  the  absence  of  any  other  neurological  signs  is  small.45  Even  if treatment were commenced after a single seizure the alteration in recurrence risk is relatively small and long term remission rates are unaltered.46 Furthermore, description of the first seizure may not be accurate and an abnormal EEG may be misleading.When a first seizure has been diagnosed as epileptic, an EEG may be considered for the purposes of assessing recurrence risk, making a syndromic diagnosis, and identifying precipitating  factors.  It  should  not  be  used  to  guide  a  decision  on  whether  or  not  to commence antiepileptic drug medication.Box 2 -  Should children with recurrent or complex febrile seizures (prolonged >15 minutes, focal or repetitive ie >2 events in a 24 hour period) have an EEG?The evidence that children with complex febrile seizures have an increased chance of developing epilepsy  is  contradictory.47  The  yield  of  abnormality  of  an  early  post-ictal  EEG  is  low  and similar to the reported rate of abnormality in children with simple febrile seizures.48       An EEG is not indicated for children with recurrent or complex febrile seizures.       Box 3 -  Should medication ever be started without an EEG?Sodium valproate, ethosuxamide and benzodiazepines suppress the typical three per second spike-wave activity in childhood absence epilepsy. Sodium valproate significantly suppresses photic induced discharges (paroxysmal responses).49 Benzodiazepines also abolish epileptiform discharges in benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS), electrical status epilepticus  during  sleep  (ESES),  non-convulsive  status  epilepticus  (NCSE)  and  West’s Syndrome.50.51       Antiepileptic drug medication should not usually be started before an EEG recording since it may mask a syndromic diagnosis.
3.3.2 STANDARD EEG WITH SYNCHRONISED VIDEOTime  locked  video  recording  during  a  standard  EEG  will  contribute  further  to  classification and diagnosis should a clinical event occur spontaneously or following induction. Among the epilepsies  for  which  this  is  particularly  useful  are  juvenile  myoclonic  epilepsy,  infantile spasms52,53 and absence seizures.543.3.3 REPEAT EEG RECORDINGS AND SLEEP EEGIf a first standard inter-ictal EEG is normal, there is evidence that a second recording increases the yield of diagnostically helpful abnormalities.34,58 Sleep has an activating effect on the EEG and repeated recordings which include a period of sleep further increase the yield of epileptiform activity  to  almost  80%.32,33  When  used  appropriately,  sleep  recordings  may  contribute significantly to epilepsy classification and particularly in syndromes such as benign rolandic epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes,55 juvenile myoclonic epilepsy56 and infantile spasms.52,57              Methods of obtaining sleep EEG include:       * partial sleep deprivation?* spontaneous or overnight sleep * sedation?* melatonin sleep.Sleep recordings may be particularly difficult to achieve in children. There is no clear evidence that one method of obtaining sleep is significantly more productive than another.34,57-59 Induced sleep with melatonin or overnight natural sleep with ambulatory EEG may be more acceptable in children than partial sleep deprivation.60,61For  children  with  recurrent  epileptic  seizures  and  a  normal  standard  EEG,  a  second EEG recording including sleep should be used to aid identification of a specific epilepsy syndrome.3.3.4 	ICTAL EEG RECORDINGIn  the  majority  of  children  with  paroxysmal  events  the  diagnosis  will  be  apparent  from  a comprehensive clinical history supplemented by examination and home video recording where necessary.  In  situations  of  continuing  clinical  uncertainty  where  epilepsy  is  suspected,  the next  steps  depend  on  the  circumstances  of  the  event,  its  frequency  and  availability  of investigations. There are a variety of EEG techniques that allow for capture of the event (epileptic or non-epileptic) on EEG. The preferred method is the use of time locked video recording to allow correlation of the event with the EEG.62-64 Ictal recording can include overnight sleep and will provide useful diagnostic information, facilitate epilepsy classification and identify previously unrecognised subtle events.65,66              Short term video EEG recordingWhere episodes occur most days, then referral for simultaneous video and EEG recording of attacks may be helpful. This may require only a few hours as an outpatient if events are very frequent or are inducible.53,65       Long term video EEG monitoring       Where episodes occur at least once a week, long term, inpatient video EEG monitoring will often allow a confident diagnosis to be made.66                      Ambulatory EEG recordingAmbulatory EEG recordings are also of value where events occur most days. They do not allow?the  same  precise  clinical  correlation  as  video  EEG  recording,  but  may  be  less  disruptive  to family life and allow a more normal environment for observing a seizure.67 Video recordings can supplement ambulatory recording.68Where  the  clinical  diagnosis  of  epilepsy  is  uncertain  and  if  events  are  sufficiently frequent,  an  ictal  EEG  should  be  used  to  make  a  diagnosis  of  an  epileptic  or  non- epileptic seizure.3.4	 BRAIN IMAGINGMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning is superior to computed tomography (CT) scanning in elective imaging to identify abnormalities underlying epilepsy (sensitivity 95% v 32%) and avoids radiation.69 In a series of 300 consecutive adults and children, MRI showed epileptogenic lesions in 12%, none of whom had generalised epilepsy.33Urgent imaging is usually not required for patients with an epileptic seizure alone,70 but CT brain imaging may be required for suspected acute symptomatic seizures or in children with focal seizures under the age of three years.71The International League Against Epilepsy has published recommendations on cranial imaging in epilepsy.72 A useful review outlining established MRI techniques in epilepsy is also available.73Most children with epilepsy should have an elective MRI brain scan. Children with the following epilepsy syndromes (which are following a typical course) do not need brain imaging:* idiopathic (primary) generalised epilepsies (eg  childhood absence epilepsy, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy or juvenile absence epilepsy)* benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (benign rolandic epilepsy).3.5  	OTHER DIAGNOSTIC INVESTIGATIONS ?Other investigations (eg cytogenetic, molecular genetic and metabolic) may be indicated to identify  specific  aetiologies  of  non-idiopathic  epilepsies,  for  example,  symptomatic  and cryptogenic epilepsies and for children with moderate or severe learning difficulties or cognitive regression. A preliminary classification of diseases frequently associated with epileptic seizures is shown in Annex 5. 3.6 	GENETICSEpilepsy often runs in families, and the recurrence risk for siblings or children of an affected person is increased compared with the background rate of epilepsy in the general population.74-77 In most cases,  the  inheritance  of  epilepsy  is  multifactorial,  with  a  contribution  from  more  than  one susceptibility  gene,  as  well  as  from  environmental  factors.78  Where  one  person  in  a  family  has idiopathic epilepsy the recurrence risk for siblings is 2.5 – 6.7% and for children is 1.6 – 6.3%.79 The recurrence risk for symptomatic epilepsies relates to the underlying aetiology. ?Studies aimed at finding genetic defects underlying the common forms of epilepsy have identified many different ion channel, neuronal receptor and synaptic abnormalities. Facilities for mutation testing are currently limited but testing may be indicated where three or more family members have idiopathic epilepsy. This should be done in conjunction with a clinical genetics service. In all patients with newly diagnosed epilepsy, a three generation family history should be taken (ie siblings, parents and grandparents, uncles, aunts, cousins). Families with a history of epilepsy should be referred to the Clinical Genetic Service particularly if three or more members of the family are affected. Families should be given information about the genetic aspects of epilepsy and likely recurrence risks. 3.7  	PYRIDOXINE DEPENDENT SEIZURESPyridoxine  dependent  seizures  form  a  rare,  but  easily  treatable,  epilepsy  syndrome  where seizures are largely resistant to AEDs. While there are typical neonatal presentations, children may present up until the third year of life.80 ?A trial of pyridoxine and its withdrawal is needed to diagnose pyridoxine dependency and should be considered in children with intractable epilepsy with onset under the age of three years. 3.8  	REFERRAL TO A TERTIARY EPILEPSY SERVICE ?There is no evidence regarding the criteria for referral of children to a tertiary epilepsy service. There may be diagnostic issues when specialist investigations are required such as videotelemetry or for clarification of a syndromic diagnosisReferral  to  a  tertiary  referral  service  is  recommended  in  any  case  where  there  are diagnostic difficulties and specialist investigations are required.4 	ManagementThis section includes provision of information to the child and family and management of risk. Initial management of the child with a first seizure in primary care and A&E settings is covered in section  2.1.  Detailed  pharmacological  management  of  the  child  with  epilepsy  is  considered  in section 5. The management of serial seizures and status epilepticus is dealt with in section 6.4.1 	INFORMATION FOR DISCUSSION WITH CHILDREN, YOUNG PEOPLE AND THEIR CARERSFamilies  who  have  a  child  with  epilepsy  have  a  right  to  clear,  accurate  and  appropriate information about the condition including the specific epilepsy syndrome, its treatment and the implications for everyday living.  Surveys of people affected by epilepsy have reported that up to 90% of them wanted more information about the cause of epilepsy, effects and interactions of drugs and the avoidance of potentially dangerous situations.81,82  As people forget or fail to take in much of what they are told during clinic visits, written information, helpline telephone numbers and contact details of voluntary organisations should be given to all families (see Annex 8).Almost as important as the quality of information is the manner in which it is given. People with epilepsy place great importance on having a doctor who is approachable, communicative and knowledgeable.83 Doctors have been criticised for failing to explain epilepsy properly to young people and neglecting the practical issues relating to everyday life.84 Many people prefer talking to an epilepsy nurse or someone from a voluntary organisation with whom they feel more  at  ease.85  Information  may  have  to  be  repeated  on  different  occasions  to  ensure understanding.  Different  people  have  different  information  needs  at  different  times  and  the person giving the information should be sensitive to and guided by the family’s needs at that particular time. A checklist is useful in giving a structure to discussion and ensuring important points are covered. This should be kept in the patient’s records, ensuring other professionals are  aware  of  what  information  has  already  been  given.  A  sample  information  checklist  is shown in Figure 1.Sensitivity  to  the  needs  of  individual  families  should  guide  the  clinician  on  how  much information to give at the first consultation.Information for families should be suited to their understanding, making adjustments for different sociocultural contexts.86 Observations of consultations reveal that information is often directed at parents rather than children.87 Children with epilepsy were less able to explain their condition than children with asthma or diabetes.88 Opportunities should be available for open discussion between healthcare professionals and the child or young person.Parents of young children value written or video material to share with relatives and others who  look  after  their  children.  Parents  also  want  to  discuss  the  implications  of  their  child’s epilepsy with someone knowledgeable.89All children with epilepsy and their carers should be given information appropriate to their condition. A summary of the contents of these discussions should be recorded.Families should be given information to take home in the most suitable format making adjustments for different sociocultural contexts, eg leaflets, fact sheets, videos.		Information should be repeated over time and understanding assessed. A  checklist  should  be  used  to  help  healthcare  professionals  deliver  appropriate information to children, families and carers. 4.1.1 	INFORMATION CHECKLIST       Figure 1: Example information checklist       	General InformationGeneral epilepsy information explanation of what epilepsy isprobable cause recurrence risks what to do if your child has another seizure explanation of investigative procedures (tests) classification of seizures?syndromes?epidemiology?prognosis?genetics?first aid sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP, see section 4.2.2)Lifestyleeducation (see section 4.1.2)leisure activitiesparentingsafety and appropriate restrictionsphotosensitivity alarms and monitorsidentity braceletsAntiepileptic drugschoice of drugefficacymissed dosesadverse effectsadherencedrug interactionsPsychosocial issues stigmamemory lossdepressionanxietymaintaining mental well-beingself esteembehaviour problemsSupport organisationsaddresses and telephone numbers of national and local epilepsy organisations  (see Annex 8)Information for specific groups of children and young peopleYoung people (>12 years)DrivingEmploymentRelationshipsalcohol and recreational drugsseizure triggerscontraception preconception (including teratogenic risks)pregnancy and breastfeedingfree prescriptionsDifficult to control epilepsyeducational supportinjury protectionfinancial allowancesmultiagency support for family (education, social work, voluntary sector etc)challenging behaviour       4.1.2 	INFORMATION FOR SCHOOLSFamilies are concerned about their child having a seizure at school and the possible associated stigma. School staff are keen to provide a safe environment for the child but this can lead to the child not being allowed to participate fully in some activities.90  Schools should be given written information  and  school  staff  should  be  offered  further  discussion  on  epilepsy  and  its management, ideally involving the parent(s). Some voluntary organisations have leaflets on epilepsy safety specifically written for teachers. Discussions about any possible restrictions on activities  within  the  school  should  always  involve  the  parents,  the  child,  school  staff  and  a health professional/voluntary sector worker who is knowledgeable about epilepsy. There may be additional risk of minor injuries for some children who have epilepsy but inclusion and independence should be prioritised and joint decisions made about risk and safety.Many children feel that more open discussion about epilepsy and education of their peers is the best way of reducing stigma and dispelling myths leading to greater acceptance of them and their seizures.84,91 The child should make the decision about what information is given to classmates. Epilepsy awareness training can be provided by health professionals, field workers or staff from voluntary organisations.Children with epilepsy which is difficult to control may require extra support to enable them to participate in all aspects of the curriculum. Educational and clinical psychologists can be helpful in supporting school staff and the child and family throughout school life. If seizures are not controlled or treatment is causing adverse effects, this should be taken into account at exam time.When children have a history of prolonged seizures, training on administration of emergency (or rescue) medication should be given to school staff who are willing to do this, and a care plan agreed with the school and family. Training of school staff (usually by the school nurse) in the administration of emergency medication should be updated regularly. Provision should be made for children with a short recovery period to be allowed to stay in school and rejoin the class when able.       Children should be enabled to participate in the full range of school activities.Children who have epilepsy should have a written care plan for their epilepsy, drawn up in agreement with the school and family.       Epilepsy awareness training and written information should be offered to schools.4.2 	MANAGEMENT OF RISK4.2.1 	SAFETYWhen a diagnosis of epilepsy is made safety may be a major concern for carers. Children may?be  inappropriately  restricted  from  participating  in  some  sports,  social  activities  and  school trips.90 In fact, children with epilepsy do not appear to have a higher rate of injury than their 3 peers without epilepsy.92,93 Few children need medical attention for seizure related injuries.94,95Water based activities have different risks and require levels of supervision appropriate to the situation. Supervision during water activities (swimming, bathing, showering) reduces the risk of accidental drowning.96Scalds and burns can occur during seizures. These are most commonly sustained during cooking, consuming hot drinks,97 during showering98 or by falling against radiators.Children with learning difficulties have an increased risk of injury compared with the general population and epilepsy may compound this.99       Leaflets on maximising safety are produced by the voluntary agencies (see Annex 8).              Safety in some common situations* Bathing/showering. Taking a shower is considered less of a risk than taking a bath. High sided shower bases should be avoided as they can trap water. Thermostatically controlled taps and showers minimise the risk of scalds. Bathing and showering are best undertaken with the bathroom door unlocked and with someone nearby.* Scalds and burns. Radiator covers may help prevent burns. Specific information is produced by the voluntary agencies.* Swimming.  Swimming  alone  is  not  advised.  The  level  of  supervision  required  for  an individual child should be based on the environment and the type of epilepsy.* Road  safety.  Crossing  at  traffic  lights  where  possible  should  minimise  the  risk  of  being knocked down should a seizure occur. When cycling, children with epilepsy should avoid traffic and cycle with a friend if possible. Cycling helmets should be worn.* Heights. Rubberised flooring in play areas and crash mats in gymnasiums allow most children with epilepsy to participate in climbing activities with their peers. Abseiling and climbing can often be undertaken as long as those in charge of the activity are aware of the possibility of a seizure occurring and feel it can be managed safely.* Photosensitivity.  Only  around  5%  of  children  with  epilepsy  have  seizures  triggered  by flickering light and this is commonest between the ages of 7 and 19 years. Antiepileptic treatment usually abolishes the photosensitive response and families should be given written information on strategies to minimise risk.Children with epilepsy should be encouraged to participate in normal activities with their peers. Supervision requirements should be individualised taking into account the type of activity and the seizure history.4.2.2 	DEATH IN EPILEPSYPeople  with  epilepsy  have  an  increased  risk  of  premature  death  compared  to  the  general population.100 Most of these deaths can be explained by the condition underlying the epilepsy, seizure-related  accidents,  or  status  epilepticus.  The  vast  majority  of  children  with  epilepsy who die do so for reasons relating to a severe underlying neurological impairment rather than the epilepsy itself.In some situations, the death of someone with epilepsy cannot be adequately explained. Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is defined as “sudden, unexpected, non-traumatic and non-drowning death in an individual with epilepsy, with or without evidence of a seizure, and excluding documented status epilepticus, where post-mortem examination does not reveal a toxicological or anatomic cause for death”.101 Most studies relate to adults and many are not based upon populations of patients with epilepsy but on examinations of the cause of death in people with epilepsy who subsequently died. The mechanism of SUDEP is poorly understood.For people with idiopathic epilepsy and without additional severe neurological impairments, the risk of sudden unexpected death appears to be very low and may not exceed that of the general population.102,103Population studies suggest that SUDEP is very uncommon in childhood.104,105 However the risk of SUDEP appears to rise in the late teenage years and early adulthood. Factors associated with this are early age of onset of epilepsy, number of seizures, severe learning difficulty and seizure type.106,107There is no general consensus on when the risk of SUDEP or other causes of premature death should be discussed with families, but it may be appropriate to discuss this issue with parents of children with symptomatic epilepsies or drug resistant epilepsies with tonic-clonic seizures.108Families should be advised if the child has an increased risk of SUDEP. They can be reassured if the risk is considered to be low.
5 	Antiepileptic drug treatmentIf antiepileptic drug treatment is to be effective, there must be a reasonable certainty about the diagnosis of epilepsy and/or epilepsy syndrome. Responses to individual drugs vary considerably according to seizure and syndrome type and the diagnosis should be reviewed at each clinical contact.The  decision  to  start  treatment  can  have  considerable  long  term  implications.  A  successful partnership between the child, the child’s family and healthcare team will achieve the best possible outcome and maximum adherence with the treatment plan.Many medicines that are prescribed for children with epilepsy are either not licensed for use below  a  particular  age  or  are  used  for  an  unlicensed  indication  (“off  label  use”).109,110  The Standing Committee on Medicines, a joint committee of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child  Health  (RCPCH)  and  the  Neonatal  and  Paediatric  Pharmacists  Group  (NPPG),  have recommended that the informed use of some unlicensed medicine or licensed medicines for an unlicensed indication is necessary in paediatric practice.111  The full RCPCH/NPPG statement is reproduced in Annex 4.The prescription of any medication requires an assessment of risk and of benefit. In this guideline the efficacy and safety of AEDs have been reviewed using the best available evidence. Where recommendations  are  graded  for  individual  AEDs,  this  is  done  irrespective  of  the  licensing status of that medication. This applies to steroids in section 5.2.3 and midazolam in section 6.2 which are currently unlicensed for the indication described.With  the  exception  of  phenytoin  there  is  no  good  evidence  of  significant  difference  in bioavailability between proprietary and generic AEDs.112,113 For many children and families issues of familiarity and acceptability of an AED taken over many years may be important to ensure good adherence. Guaranteeing the consistent supply of a single formulation of a particular generic AED may be problematic because of wholesaler and community pharmacy purchasing arrangements  and  where  there  is  a  change  in  manufacturer  of  an  AED.  This  could  militate against the use of generic AEDs where frequent changes of formulation may be inevitable.5.1 	WHEN TO START ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG TREATMENT5.1.1 	FEBRILE SEIZURESFebrile seizures are common; most are brief and require no medical treatment. The child will usually only have one seizure. The overall risk of recurrence is 25%. Risk factors for recurrence are  a  first  seizure  before  the  age  of  15  months;  epilepsy  or  febrile  seizures  in  a  first  degree relative; or a prolonged focal seizure. While phenobarbital and sodium valproate may reduce recurrence  rates,  the  risk  of  adverse  effects  does  not  justify  their  routine  use.  They  do  not influence the risk of subsequently developing epilepsy.114 Phenobarbital can cause adverse cognitive effects which may persist following withdrawal.115,116Intermittent rectal diazepam does not appear to alter recurrence rates of febrile seizures, or to influence later complications such as subsequent epilepsy and developmental disabilities.117 However, parents should be given clear advice on the first aid management of a seizure and emergency medication if there has been a prolonged febrile seizure (see section 6.2).B Children with febrile seizures, even if recurrent, should not be treated prophylactically with antiepileptic drugs.5.1.2 	PROVOKED SEIZURESTraumatic brain injuries are a common cause of provoked seizures in children. A systematic review that included children demonstrated that AEDs, in particular phenytoin and carbamazepine, given after head injury are effective in preventing early seizures (within one week). This early treatment is ineffective in reducing mortality or preventing the later emergence of epilepsy.118Long term prophylactic antiepileptic drug treatment for children with head injuries is not indicated.5.1.3 	UNPROVOKED, TONIC-CLONIC EPILEPTIC SEIZURESThe majority of children with a first unprovoked seizure will not have a recurrence. Those with a normal EEG whose initial seizures occur whilst awake have a five year recurrence risk of 21%.  Risk  factors  for  recurrence  include  remote  symptomatic  aetiology,  abnormal  EEG,  a history of prior febrile convulsions and age less than three years.44,119A follow-up study of children who had experienced tonic-clonic seizures found that, in nearly?half  of  the  children,  the  frequency  of  seizures  diminished  without  treatment.120  A  further population based cohort study suggests that children may have up to ten tonic-clonic or partial seizures  before  either  subsequent  seizure  control  or  seizure  remission  rate  are  adversely affected.121 This study excluded seizure types more typically associated with epilepsy syndromes for which treatment is recognised to be problematic.       In  a  large  randomised  study,  around  three  quarters  of  children  did  not  experience  seizure recurrence within seven days following a first unprovoked, tonic-clonic epileptic seizure. Among children who did relapse, those given AED therapy immediately following their first seizure experienced 50% fewer seizures than the control group, however longer term follow up of the same cohort showed that remission rates were similar in both groups.122,46When considering treatment, the clinician, the child and family must take into account both what may be an isolated event and the risks of adverse effects of AED treatment.  The benefit of early treatment appears to be confined to a short term reduction in seizure recurrence risk but has no effect on long term remission rates.A Antiepileptic  drug  treatment  should  not  be  commenced  routinely  after  a  first, unprovoked tonic-clonic seizure.The decision to commence antiepileptic drug treatment should be reached jointly by the  epilepsy  specialist  and  the  family.  It  should  be  informed  by  a  knowledge  and understanding  of  the  epilepsy  syndrome,  including  an  assessment  of  recurrence  risk and the likelihood of long term remission.5.2 	CHOICE OF FIRST ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG       There is a paucity of studies on the comparative efficacy of AEDs in specific epilepsy syndromes.       In  newly  diagnosed  epilepsy,  across  age  groups  and  all  seizure  types,  several  randomised control trials of carbamazepine, sodium valproate, clobazam, phenytoin and phenobarbital show that they are effective but fail to identify significant differences in efficacy between these medications.123-127 In a single trial, topiramate failed to show an advantage over carbamazepine or sodium valproate.128The potential adverse effects of AEDs should be a major determinant of the choice of drug in the individual  child.  Antiepileptic  drugs  can  exacerbate  seizures  in  some  epileptic  syndromes (see Table 2).129-133
Table 2: Antiepileptic drugs which may WORSEN specific syndromes or seizures	Antiepileptic drugEpileptic syndrome/seizure typecarbamazepine, vigabatrin, tiagabine, phenytoinchildhood absence epilepsy, juvenile absence epilepsy, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy134vigabatrinabsences and absence status134clonazepamgeneralised tonic-status in Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome135lamotrigineDravet’s syndrome132 juvenile myoclonic epilepsy136,1375.2.1 	GENERALISED EPILEPSIESA  systematic  review  of  the  treatment  of  absence  epilepsy  in  children  found  no  RCTs  upon which to make recommendations about the respective merits of individual AEDs.138  Randomised trials  comparing  the  efficacy  of  sodium  valproate  and  ethosuxamide  in  childhood  absence epilepsy have found no difference in effectiveness.139,140 One RCT demonstrated that lamotrigine was better than placebo in the treatment of absence seizures, but this was a small study with a very short period of follow up.141There are no robust systematic reviews or RCTs to support the use of specific AED monotherapy in other generalised epilepsy syndromes.Results from case series suggest that sodium valproate is effective for the treatment of idiopathic generalised  epilepsies  (juvenile  myoclonic  epilepsy,  generalised  seizures  on  early  morning wakening, juvenile absence epilepsy).142-144 No comparative studies were identified to determine whether any of the newer drugs are as effective.In a retrospective case series which examined remission rates in idiopathic generalised epilepsies treated  with  sodium  valproate,  topiramate  or  lamotrigine  remission  was  most  likely  to  be achieved  with  sodium  valproate,  followed  by  topiramate.  Remission  was  least  likely  to  be induced by lamotrigine.145In symptomatic generalised epilepsies (Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, Dravet’s syndrome, atypical absence epilepsies and unclassified myoclonic epilepsies), sodium valproate, lamotrigine and clobazam reduce seizure frequencies.146-149C The choice of first AED should be determined where possible by the syndromic diagnosis and potential adverse effects.5.2.2	FOCAL EPILEPSIESA wide range of AEDs (phenytoin, sodium valproate, carbamazepine, clobazam, lamotrigine, topiramate, oxcarbazepine, vigabatrin) are effective as monotherapy in the treatment of focal seizures.150-155,173  There are very few head-to-head studies comparing the effectiveness of different AEDs. None subclassify focal seizures into epilepsy syndromes. 5.2.3 	WEST’S SYNDROME AND EPILEPTIC INFANTILE SPASMSThe goal of treatment is to abolish epileptic spasms and hypsarrythmia. In West’s syndrome secondary to tuberous sclerosis, vigabatrin is more effective than corticosteroids156,157 increasing development quotients and resolving autistic-type features.158 For other aetiologies including cryptogenic forms of West’s syndrome prednisilone or corticotropin appear to be more effective than vigabatrin.159 In adults, vigabatrin has been associated with significant adverse effects (see section 5.4.2).High dose sodium valproate therapy (100-300 mg/kg/day)160 and nitrazepam161 are efficacious in resistant West’s syndrome. Topiramate also has some effect in controlling infantile spasms refractory to other medications.162B In  West’s  syndrome,  corticotropin  or  corticosteroids  should  be  used  as  first  line treatment. Where West’s syndrome is caused by tuberous sclerosis, vigabatrin is superior.5.3 	ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG COMBINATION THERAPYUp to 70% of childhood epilepsies will respond to the first or second AED. If two appropriate AEDs have failed independently as monotherapy, the chance of further monotherapy controlling seizures  is  very  low  and  combination  therapy  should  be  considered.163  Prior  to  initiating combination therapy, consider:* Is the diagnosis correct? (see sections 2 and 3)* Is adherence with treatment poor?164* Is the choice and dose of AED appropriate for the epilepsy syndrome or seizure type?131 (see Table 2)5.3.1 	IDIOPATHIC GENERALISED EPILEPSIESIn  drug  resistant  idiopathic  generalised  epilepsy,  topiramate,  lamotrigine  and  clobazam  are effective as add-on treatments.147,165,1665.3.3 	SYMPTOMATIC GENERALISED EPILEPSIESLamotrigine and topiramate are effective add-on treatments in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome.167-169  Clobazam,  clonazepam  and  nitrazepam  can  be  useful  in  the  idiopathic  and  symptomatic generalised epilepsies.170Stiripentol has antiepileptic activity in Dravet’s Syndrome when used with clobazam and sodium valproate.171 Topiramate may also be used in combination with other first line AEDs.1725.3.2 	FOCAL SEIZURESLamotrigine,  gabapentin,  topiramate,  tiagabine  and  oxcarbazepine  are  effective  as  add-on therapies for focal seizures.173-177There is evidence from case series that levetiracetam and acetazolamide may also be useful. 178-180The child, family, carers and doctors should accept that some seizures persist despite adequate trials  of  appropriate  medication.  This  is  particularly  true  in  certain  epilepsy  syndromes  and some epilepsies associated with severe cerebral palsy and severe/profound learning difficulties. Reduction  of  seizure  frequency  must  be  balanced  against  the  adverse  effects  of  drugs.  For some  children  with  intractable  epilepsy,  it  may  sometimes  be  appropriate  to  withdraw  all antiepileptic drugs.A When appropriate monotherapy fails to reduce seizure frequency, combination therapy should be considered.The choice of combination therapy should be guided by the epilepsy syndrome and the adverse effect profile of the AED. Where  there  is  no  response  to  an  appropriate  AED,  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of epilepsy should be reviewed. 5.4 	ADVERSE EFFECTS OF ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGSAdverse effects from AEDs are common and are a major cause of discontinuing drug treatment. Many adverse effects are dose related and predictable. These can be minimised by gradual escalation of the dose and dose reduction should symptoms persist.5.4.1  	IDIOSYNCRATIC DRUG REACTIONS ?Idiosyncratic drug reactions usually arise early in treatment but can occur at any time and are potentially  serious.  Rash  is  a  common  adverse  effect  in  children  and  is  associated  with carbamazepine, phenytoin and lamotrigine. Rarely, a severe hypersensitivity syndrome may occur which may be life threatening. 5.4.2	CHRONIC ADVERSE EFFECTS Sodium  valproate  is  associated  with  significant  weight  gain  in  children  and  adolescents.181 Being overweight at the start of treatment may be a significant predictor of further weight gain with this drug.182Parents  frequently  report  cognitive  adverse  effects  of  AEDs  in  their  children.  The  few  well controlled studies do not demonstrate significant cognitive impairment with clobazam, sodium valproate,  carbamazepine  or  phenytoin.183,184  Phenobarbital  may  have  an  adverse  effect  on cognitive function in children.115For adults treated with vigabatrin, visual field impairment is relatively common and may be irreversible. Few data exist in children. The risk of visual field defects must be balanced against the benefits of treating West’s syndrome or symptomatic focal epilepsies.Gum enlargement or overgrowth is frequently associated with phenytoin and rarely with sodium valproate and vigabatrin.185 This can prevent the maintenance of good oral hygiene and lead to bleeding,  tenderness,  dental  decay,  periodontal  disease  and  infection.  Overgrowth  can  be reduced by meticulous daily oral hygiene, but this may be difficult in some children, particularly in those with physical and learning difficulties.5.4.3	TERATOGENIC SIDE EFFECTS ?The overall risk of major fetal malformation is approximately 2% in any pregnancy. This increases 2-3 fold in women taking a single AED.186 Data suggest that the risk with sodium valproate may be higher than with lamotrigine or carbamazepine.187,188Two retrospective epidemiological studies have also suggested an association between in utero exposure to sodium valproate and risk of developmental delay.189,190Recent advice from the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) states that  women  of  childbearing  potential  should  not  be  started  on  sodium  valproate  without specialist advice.191Adolescent girls taking AEDs and their parents should be advised of the risks of fetal malformations and developmental delay. ?Contraception and pregnancy in patients with epilepsies are addressed in SIGN guideline 70 Investigation and Management of Adults with Epilepsy.55.4.4	MONITORING FOR ADVERSE EFFECTS IN ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS ?There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  routine  laboratory  monitoring  for  adverse  effects  can reduce the risk of developing a given adverse effect to a drug. Laboratory monitoring is required in symptomatic patients only. ?There  is  evidence  that  routine  monitoring  of  AED  drug  levels  does  not  affect  clinical management, except to adjust phenytoin dosage.192B Routine AED level monitoring is not indicated in children.Clear  advice  on  the  management  of  the  potential  adverse  effects  of  AEDs  should  be discussed with children and parents or carers.5.5	COMPLEMENTARY THERAPYThere is no evidence to support the use of complementary therapies in children and young people with epilepsy. Families should be asked about the use of complementary therapy and advised about potential adverse effects, mainly interactions with prescribed medication. There is potential for reduction of the plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, phenobarbital and phenytoin if St John’s Wort is used concomitantly.1935.6  	PSYCHOLOGICAL TREATMENT ?There is no robust evidence to suggest that psychological treatments such as cognitive behaviour therapy or EEG biofeedback are effective in the treatment of seizures in children.194 Psychological symptoms associated with epilepsy may merit treatment in their own right. 5.7	WITHDRAWAL OF ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS ?Overall, 60 to 70% of children who have been seizure free on AEDs for two years or more will remain seizure free when the drugs are withdrawn.195,196 Any relapses tend to occur within two years. Long term remission can be regained following a further seizure free period back on treatment.197A number of risk factors determine seizure relapse following withdrawal. Relapse risk is increased in symptomatic epilepsy, by age at seizure onset (12 years or older), short duration of seizure freedom (less than six months), and an abnormal EEG at discontinuation.196,198-201 A syndromic 1+ diagnosis may also predict relapse. Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, a common epilepsy syndrome 3 in adolescence, has a particularly high relapse rate.202Decisions  regarding  AED  withdrawal  should  be  informed  by  discussion  with  the  child  and family. Important factors influencing that decision include fear of further seizures, risk of death or injury and concerns about the adverse effects of continued AED treatment. In young people, issues concerning driving, employment and pregnancy should also be considered. ?In children there appears to be no difference between gradual withdrawal of AEDs over a six month period and a quick taper of six weeks.203 Sudden discontinuation of AEDs, particularly phenobarbital and the benzodiazepines should be avoided. A Withdrawal  of  antiepileptic  drug  treatment  should  be  considered  in  children  who have been seizure free for two or more years.5.8 	WHEN TO REFER FOR TERTIARY CAREThere is no robust evidence regarding the criteria for referral of children to a tertiary epilepsy service.  Children  with  drug  resistant  epilepsy  (those  who  have  failed  to  respond  to  two appropriate drugs in adequate dosage after a six month period) should be referred.204 Early referral  should  be  considered  in  infants  and  preschool  children  with  very  frequent  seizures and developmental stagnation.The ketogenic diet has a role to play in the management of intractable epilepsy and significant proportions  of  children  will  experience  clinically  significant  seizure  reduction.205-207  This technique should be supervised in a unit where expertise in the diet exists.Neurosurgical  procedures  are  an  effective  treatment  for  some  children  with  drug  resistant epilepsy. Some children will be cured by appropriate surgery. It is important that referral for surgery be considered early in any focal drug resistant epilepsy as the benefits will be greater in younger patients. If curative surgery is not feasible, children with intractable epilepsy should be  referred  for  consideration  of  palliative  surgical  procedures  (corpus  callosotomy,  subpial transection  and  vagal  nerve  stimulation).  Assessment  for  surgery  should  be  performed  in  a specialist unit.Referral to tertiary specialist care should be considered if a child fails to respond to two AEDs appropriate to the epilepsy in adequate dosages over a period of six months.6 	Management of prolonged or serial seizures and convulsive status epilepticus6.1  	DEFINITIONSMost tonic-clonic seizures last less than two minutes. Children who have prolonged seizures (>5 minutes) or serial seizures (brief, repetitive seizures with recovery of consciousness between seizures) are more likely to progress to convulsive status epilepticus (CSE). ?Convulsive status epilepticus is conventionally defined as epileptic activity persisting for 30 minutes, causing a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms.208 Early treatment before admission to hospital reduces the length of seizure and leads to the use of fewer drugs.2096.2  	PROLONGED OR SERIAL SEIZURESThe management of a prolonged seizure and of serial seizures is similar. Rectal diazepam is effective in treating prolonged/serial seizures210,211 but has many shortcomings when used in the home and community settings. These include difficulties in administration for  wheelchair  users  and  unreliable  bowel  absorption.  It  is  socially  unacceptable  for  many young people and their carers.Buccal or intranasal midazolam is as effective as rectal diazepam in the treatment of prolonged seizures.212 Parents and carers have found buccal or nasal midazolam easy to use and a preferable alternative in a community setting.213,214 For a small number of children, rectal paraldehyde may be more appropriate.B Prolonged or serial seizures should be treated with either nasal or buccal  midazolam or rectal diazepam.Approximately  80%  of  children  will  respond  to  benzodiazepine  emergency  medication.215 Children who fail to respond to initial emergency medication should be managed according to the recommendations in section 6.3. It is not necessary to wait until seizure activity has persisted for beyond 30 minutes.6.3 	CONVULSIVE STATUS EPILEPTICUSConvulsive status epilepticus is a medical emergency with a significant morbidity and mortality that can sometimes be attributed to inadequate or delayed treatment. Overtreatment also carries significant risks of respiratory and cardiac depression. The management of CSE in children is based largely on the management of CSE in adults, using age appropriate doses.216Annex 7 gives an example protocol for the management of convulsive status epilepticus. There is  little  robust  evidence  to  guide  the  design  of  a  management  pathway  in  childhood  CSE. While many protocols for the management of CSE now suggest intravenous lorazepam as “first line” treatment there is no robust evidence that this is superior to diazepam.216 Where intravenous access  is  difficult  in  children,  intramuscular  midazolam  is  as  effective  as  initial  intravenous diazepam.217If  the  seizure  has  not  stopped  following  administration  of  a  first  dose  of  benzodiazepine, management guidelines have generally suggested repeating this dose followed by a loading dose of phenytoin.218 Cardiac monitoring is necessary during phenytoin infusion.All units admitting children should have a protocol for the management of convulsive status epilepticus.6.3.1 	CONVULSIVE STATUS EPILEPTICUS CONTINUING LONGER THAN 30 MINUTESIf  CSE  persists  beyond  a  further  30  minutes,  the  child  should  be  admitted  to  an  intensive treatment  unit  and  EEG  monitoring  should  be  undertaken.  Midazolam,  phenobarbital  or thiopental are most commonly used in these circumstances.2196.3.2 	NON-CONVULSIVE STATUS EPILEPTICUSNon-convulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) may accompany any brain insult. The underlying cause should be treated appropriately. NCSE is also commonly encountered in the epileptic encephalopathies. In children with or without a previous diagnosis of epilepsy, who show a change  in  personality,  recent  onset  psychosis,  any  regression  in  communication,  motor  or behavioural  skills,  the  diagnosis  of  NCSE  should  be  considered.  The  diagnosis  of  NCSE  is difficult and critically dependent on EEG.There are no prospective randomised controlled trials for the treatment of NCSE in children. Treatment with benzodiazepines (oral, buccal, nasal, rectal)220-222 corticotropin223,224 or sodium valproate is effective.225 Resistant NCSE may require intravenous lorazepam and/or phenytoin.226Management of children with non-convulsive status epilepticus is complex and should be discussed with a specialist.7 	Behaviour and learning7.1  	ACADEMIC  OUTCOME ?Epilepsy and learning disabilities are common conditions both singly and in combination. The relationship between them is complex. In some situations a particular condition may be the cause of the epilepsy, in others it may be an effect of the epilepsy and in others the precise cause and effect relationship may be unclear. ?Although many children with epilepsy have intellectual functioning in the normal range, specific patterns of cognitive strengths and weaknesses, including memory impairment may be associated with this disorder. Up to 50% of children with epilepsy require additional support at school.13 Many of these children have learning disabilities which relate to an underlying brain disorder. However, in other situations difficulties in learning may be more directly related to the epilepsy and  its  management,  for  example,  frequent  epileptic  discharges  and  adverse  effects  of medication.227Certain epilepsy syndromes, including West’s syndrome, Dravet syndrome, myoclonic astatic epilepsy,  Landau-Kleffner  syndrome  and  Lennox-Gastaut  syndrome,  are  strongly  associated with severe cognitive deterioration (epileptic encephalopathy). Other epilepsy syndromes (eg benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes, limbic epilepsies or childhood absence epilepsy) can be associated with milder or specific educational problems.228-2327.2  	BEHAVIOURAL/PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERSEffects on learning may be further compounded by associated behavioural difficulties. Children with epilepsy have approximately double the rates of behavioural and psychiatric disorders compared with the general childhood population.233-239 Depression scores are elevated in one in four children with epilepsy, and anxiety scores are elevated in one in seven children. ?The prevalence of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) symptoms is reported in up to 40% of children with epilepsy (depending on the population studied and selection criteria). Attention difficulties rather than hyperactivity predominate in children who have epilepsy and ADHD.240All children with epilepsy should have their behavioural and academic progress reviewed on a regular basis by the epilepsy team. Children with academic or behavioural difficulties should have appropriate educational and/or psychological assessment and intervention. 7.3  	ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS Parents frequently report behavioural and cognitive adverse effects in children receiving AEDs. Assessing  the  nature  and  effect  of  AEDs  on  cognition  has  been  difficult  to  isolate  from  the effects of epilepsy, underlying brain disorder, variations in IQ scoring and environmental factors. Despite  the  large  body  of  evidence  on  this  subject  there  are  few  well  controlled  studies. Phenobarbital treatment may result in severe memory impairment, significant falls in IQ scores and behavioural disturbance.241,242 However, the cognitive adverse effects of carbamazepine and sodium valproate appear to be limited to mild, general psychomotor slowing. There are no satisfactory studies on the newer AEDs upon which to make clear recommendations.243,244 Combination therapy may further increase the likelihood of adverse side effects. If a child experiences cognitive or behavioural adverse effects from a specific AED, an alternative drug should be considered. 7.4  	ASSOCIATED NEUROLOGICAL CONDITIONSThere is an increased prevalence of epilepsy in children with learning difficulties. 15% of children with mild learning difficulties and 30% with severe learning difficulties will develop epilepsy.245Epilepsy  is  commonly  seen  in  children  with  cerebral  palsy  and,  particularly,  in  those  with quadriplegia. One in five children with hemiplegia has active epilepsy246 and there is a strong association of epilepsy with cognitive impairment.247Epilepsy prevalence rates in autism, encompassing a range of seizure types, show significant variation  (5-38%).248  When  epilepsy  and  learning  difficulty  coexist  the  risk  of  autism  rises threefold by 10 years of age.249Many neurogenetic  disorders  present  with  epileptic  seizures.  Examples  include  Down’s Syndrome, Angelman Syndrome, Rett Syndrome, Fragile X Syndrome and tuberous sclerosis. Children  with  these  conditions  often  have  epilepsy  that  is  more  severe  and  management  is further complicated by the underlying disorder.7.5 	EPILEPSY AND THE USE OF OTHER MEDICATIONS7.5.1 	NEUROSTIMULANTSChildren and young people with epilepsy show increased prevalence of ADHD symptoms.250 National  guidelines  support  the  use  of  neurostimulants  to  reduce  the  core  symptoms  of ADHD.251,252Although the British National Formulary recommends caution in the use of neurostimulants when there is a history of epilepsy (and discontinuation if seizures occur), there is no reliable evidence that such treatment is associated with an increased seizure risk, altered antiepileptic drug levels, or increased drug related adverse effects.253-256D Neurostimulant  treatment  should  not  be  withheld,  when  indicated,  from  children with epilepsy and ADHD.7.5.2 	MELATONINSleep  disorders  are  common  problems  in  children  with  epilepsy  and  require  appropriate management.257,258 In some situations melatonin is appropriate and this medication is widely prescribed in paediatric practice.259,260Concerns that melatonin may be a proconvulsant have not been confirmed.261,262D Epilepsy, or a history of seizures, are not contraindications to the use of melatonin for the treatment of sleep disorders in children and young people.7.5.3 	OTHER PSYCHOTROPIC MEDICATIONOther  psychotropic  medication  may  be  of  considerable  value  in  the  management  of  some children and young people with epilepsy and associated behavioural and psychiatric disorders. Care should be taken to exclude those in whom alternative management strategies, for example behavioural approaches, may be appropriate.263Fluoxetine is presently the only selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) recommended by the  Medicines  and  Healthcare  products  Regulatory  Agency  (MHRA)  for  the  treatment  of depression  and  obsessive  compulsive  disorders  in  children  and  young  people.264  Atypical neuroleptics,  such  as  risperidone,  are  increasingly  used  in  the  management  of  challenging behavioural problems associated with autism and in children with severe aggression.265,266Systematic  studies  in  relation  to  the  use  of  antidepressants  and  neuroleptic  medications  in children with epilepsy are lacking.The  British  National  Formulary  recommends  caution  in  the  use  of  SSRIs  (fluoxetine)  and risperidone in patients with epilepsy, although there is evidence, principally from adult studies that significant seizure exacerbations are rare.267,268Selective  serotonin  reuptake  inhibitors  and  atypical  neuroleptics  such  as  risperidone should not be withheld, when indicated, in children and young people with epilepsy and associated behavioural and psychiatric disorders.8 	Models of careChildren with epilepsy require a multidisciplinary approach to their care. This may include a range of professionals, for example, primary, secondary and tertiary care paediatricians and neurologists, paediatric epilepsy nurses, child psychiatrists and psychologists. Access is also required  to  a  range  of  diagnostic  and  investigative  tools,  including  neurophysiology  and neuroradiology. Close liaison with education, social work and voluntary sector is of considerable importance.8.1 	SPECIALIST EPILEPSY CLINICSA Cochrane review found no good studies from which to determine the effectiveness of epilepsy clinics in comparison to medical clinics.269Many audits, patient satisfaction surveys and national reports express concern about standards of epilepsy care in adults and children.  Highlighted problems are lack of systematic follow up, inappropriate use of investigations, patients being seen by non-specialists, inappropriate drug usage,  poor  communication  between  primary  and  secondary  care,  inadequate  information and time for discussion, and poor patient knowledge.270Specialist clinics are well established in the management of other chronic childhood diseases such as diabetes, cystic fibrosis and childhood cancer.271 A similar model is likely to be suitable for children with epilepsy. The needs of young people (aged > 13 years), and their transition to  the  adult  service  should  be  addressed.22  A  dedicated  young  persons’  clinic  is  a  suitable setting for discussion of issues appropriate to the age group (see section 4.1.1).272Where  locality  based  specialist  neurology  services  are  not  available  or  difficult  to  access, clinical  networks  may  be  a  suitable  model.  Services  developed  within  the  network  could include joint consultations with visiting neurologists, shared protocols, access to appropriate investigations, continued medical education, audit, and peer review.In contrast to the management of epilepsy in adults, it is unusual for the general practitioner to take the lead in the management of childhood epilepsy.273 If the GP is to contribute effectively to care, good communication with the specialist clinic is essential. The clinic letter to the GP or paediatrician should cover the topics discussed at the consultation, with particular reference to:* Diagnosis* Prognosis* Management* follow up* monitoring seizures, aiming to improve control by adjustment of medication or re-referral.The  letter  should  be  copied  to  families  and,  when  appropriate,  to  the  young  person  with epilepsy.  It  is  good  practice  to  include  the  community  paediatrician  and  any  nursing  staff involved (eg health visitor, school nurse, community paediatric nurse) in the correspondence. Parents should be encouraged to share the correspondence with school staff.* Children with epilepsy should have access to specialist epilepsy services, including dedicated young people and transition clinics* Each child should have an individual management plan agreed with the family and primary care team* Annual review is suggested as a minimum, even for children with well controlled epilepsy,  to  identify  potential  problems,  ensure  discussion  on  issues  such  as withdrawal of treatment, and minimise the possibility of becoming lost to follow up.8.2 	ROLE OF EPILEPSY NURSE SPECIALISTSSystematic evaluation has provided no robust evidence that epilepsy nurse specialists, compared to  traditional  models  of  care,  improve  seizure  frequency,  depression  and  anxiety  scores  or quality of life scores. 270However other studies have suggested improvements in continuity of care, AED adherence and length of inpatient stays274-277 Seventy per cent of patients attending clinics run by epilepsy nurse  specialists  had  previously  unidentified  problems  resolved  by  the  nurse  including misdiagnosis, overmedication and lack of awareness of drug side effects.278The role of epilepsy nurses follows the wider role of the specialist nurse and includes:* being a first contact and advocate for the child and family* providing specific up to date information and advice* liaison between the family, school and the multidisciplinary team involved in the child’s care.   D Each epilepsy team should include paediatric epilepsy nurse specialists. 8.3 	ROLE OF THE VOLUNTARY SECTORThere are agencies throughout the UK (See Annex 8) which offer information, advice, support, advocacy and training for families affected by epilepsy. A survey of contacts between 2002- 2003 made to four agencies (National Society for Epilepsy, Epilepsy Action, Epilepsy Scotland and Quarriers Fieldwork Service in Grampian) showed that many people (patients, carers and professionals) request information about all aspects of epilepsy from their helplines and websites and these appear to be popular sources of information. They also provide leaflets and training to  people  with  epilepsy,  families  and  carers  as  well  as  health,  educational  and  other professionals.Children and families should be advised of the range of services provided by the voluntary sector.9 	Development of the guideline9.1  	INTRODUCTION ?SIGN is a collaborative network of clinicians and other healthcare professionals and is part of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. SIGN guidelines are developed by multidisciplinary groups of  practicing  clinicians  using  a  standard  methodology  based  on  a  systematic  review  of  the evidence. Further details about SIGN and the guideline development methodology are contained in “SIGN 50: A Guideline Developer’s Handbook”, available at www.sign.ac.uk 9.2  	THE GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT GROUP 	Dr Martin Kirkpatrick (Chair)Consultant Paediatric Neurologist, Ninewells Hospital, DundeeMrs Sheena BevanQuarriers Epilepsy Fieldworker and Clinical Liaison Officer, Aberdeen?Ms Jo Campbell School Nurse, Elgin?Ms Francesca Chappell Information Officer, SIGN Dr John Dean Consultant Geneticist, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary Dr Liam DorrisLecturer in Clinical Psychology, University of Glasgow and Paediatric Neuropsychologist, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow Ms Margot Dymock Service Manager, Children’s Services, Dundee Dr Ali El-Ghorr Programme Manager, SIGN Dr George Farmer Consultant Paediatrician, Raigmore Hospital, Inverness Dr Eleanor Guthrie General Practitioner, Glasgow Dr Khalid Ibrahim Specialist Registrar, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee Dr Patricia JacksonConsultant Paediatrician, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh Mrs Patricia MacLaren Lay Representative, Aberdeen Ms Arlene Mooney National Association of Special Educational Needs, Edinburgh Dr Ann O’ Hara Associate Specialist, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Aberdeen Dr Moray Nairn Programme Manager, SIGNDr Mary O’ ReganConsultant Paediatric Neurologist, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow Dr Michael PrendergastConsultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist, Prudhoe Hospital, Northumberland Dr Aline RussellConsultant Clinical Neurophysiologist, Southern General Hospital, Glasgow Dr Chris Steer Consultant Paediatrician, Victoria Hospital, Kirkcaldy Mrs Ailsa Stein Information Officer, SIGN Ms Susan Stewart Helpline and Information Manager, Epilepsy Scotland, Glasgow Lead Divisional Pharmacist, Mrs Sue StobieRoyal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh Mrs Lesslie Taylor Lay Representative, Helensburgh Dr William WhitehouseSenior Lecturer in Paediatric Neurology, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham Ms Margaret WilsonPaediatric Epilepsy Nurse, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, GlasgowThe membership of the guideline development group was confirmed following consultation with  the  member  organisations  of  SIGN.  All  members  of  the  guideline  development  group made  declarations  of  interest  and  further  details  of  these  are  available  on  request  from  the SIGN Executive. Guideline development and literature review expertise, support and facilitation were provided by the SIGN Executive.9.3  	SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW ?The evidence base for this guideline was synthesised in accordance with SIGN methodology. A systematic review of the literature was carried out using an explicit search strategy devised by a SIGN Information Officer. Databases searched include Medline, Embase, CINAHL, PsychINFO, and the Cochrane Library. The year range covered was 1980-2003. Internet searches were carried out on various websites including the New Zealand Guidelines Programme, NELH Guidelines Finder, and the US National Guidelines Clearinghouse. The Medline version of the main search strategies can be found on the SIGN website, in the section covering supplementary guideline material. The main searches were supplemented by material identified by individual members of the development group. All selected papers were evaluated by a minimum of two members of the group using standard SIGN methodological checklists before conclusions were considered as evidence. 9.4  SIGN  AND  NICE ?The National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) technology appraisal 79, Newer Drugs for Epilepsy in Children,279 approved for use in Scotland in 2004, gave guidance on the use of licensed medications for epilepsy in children. Recommendations in sections 5 and 6 of this SIGN guideline, which considers both licensed and unlicensed medications, may therefore differ from those given in the NICE appraisal. ?In July 2001 the Department of Health and National Assembly for Wales instructed NICE to develop a clinical guideline on epilepsy. This work was allocated to the National Collaborating Centre for Primary Care (NCC-PC). Concurrently, SIGN were working on the development of two  epilepsy  guidelines:  SIGN  70,  Diagnosis  and  Management  of  Adults  with  Epilepsy (published in April 2003) and this guideline, SIGN 81, Diagnosis and Management of Epilepsies in Children and Young People (published in March 2005). Members of the two SIGN guideline development groups, the NICE guideline development group and representatives of both SIGN Executive and the NCC-PC met frequently throughout the development phases of the respective guidelines in order to ensure that the publications would complement rather than conflict with each other. The results of the evidence reviews completed by each team were shared, but the formulation of recommendations for each guideline remained separate. 9.5  	CONSULTATION AND PEER REVIEW 9.5.1 	NATIONAL OPEN MEETINGA national open meeting is the main consultative phase of SIGN guideline development, at which the guideline development group presents its draft recommendations for the first time. The national open meeting for this guideline was held on 9 October 2003 and was attended by around 180 representatives of all the key specialties relevant to the guideline. The draft guideline was also available on the SIGN website for a limited period at this stage to allow those unable to attend the meeting to contribute to the development of the guideline.9.5.2 	SPECIALIST REVIEWThis guideline was also reviewed in draft form by the following independent expert referees, who were asked to comment primarily on the comprehensiveness and accuracy of interpretation of the evidence base supporting the recommendations in the guideline. SIGN is very grateful to all of these experts for their contribution to the guideline.Dr Richard Appleton Consultant Paediatric Neurologist, Alder Hey Hospital, Liverpool Dr Sarah AylettConsultant Paediatric Neurologist, Great Ormond Street Children’s Hospital, London Professor Gus BakerProfessor of Clinical Neuropsychology and Consultant Clinical Neuropsychologist, The Walton Centre for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Liverpool Dr Gordon BatesChild and Adolescent Neuropsychiatrist, Birmingham Children’s Hospital NHS Trust Dr Harry Baumer Consultant Paediatrician, Derriford Hospital, Plymouth Dr Michael Blair Consultant Paediatrician, Crosshouse Hospital,Kilmarnock Dr Alison BlakeConsultant Clinical Neurophysiologist, Worcester Royal Infirmary Dr Duncan Cameron Consultant Paediatrician, Clan Clwyd Hospital, Rhyl Dr Stephen ChapmanConsultant Paediatric Radiologist, The Children’s Hospital, Birmingham Ms Margaret EdwardsTeaching Fellow, Department of Nursing and Midwifery, Stirling University Dr Colin Ferrie Consultant Paediatric Neurologist, Leeds General Hospital, Leeds Dr Elaine Hughes Consultant Paediatrician, Kings College Hospital, London Dr Harpreet Kohli Medical Adviser, NHS Quality Improvement Scotland ‘Dr Neil LeadbeaterHealth Planning and Quality Division, National Pharmaceutical Forum, Scottish Executive Health Department Dr Donald MacGregor Consultant Paediatrician, Perth Royal Infirmary, Perth Dr Ailsa McLellanConsultant Paediatric Neurologist, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh Dr Robert McWilliam Consultant Paediatric Neurologist, Glasgow, for Academy of Royal Colleges and Faculties in Scotland Miss Laura MeikleAdditional Support for Learning Act Implementation Team, Scottish Executive Education Department Professor Patrick Morrison Consultant Clinical Geneticist, Belfast City Hospital Trust Dr Barbara PhilipsConsultant in Paediatric Emergency Medicine, Alder Hey Hospital, Liverpool Dr Andrew PowerHead of Medicines Management Team, Gartnavel Royal Hospital, Glasgow Dr Helen Shannon Consultant Radiologist, Raigmore Hospital, Inverness Dr Kate SpillaneConsultant Clinical Neurophysiologist, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee Dr Zenobia ZaiwallaConsultant in Paediatric Clinical Neurophysiology, Park Hospital for Children and Special Centre for Children with Epilepsy, Oxford9.5.3 	SIGN EDITORIAL GROUPAs a final quality control check, the guideline was reviewed by an editorial group comprising the relevant specialty representatives on SIGN Council to ensure that the specialist reviewers’ comments have been addressed adequately and that any risk of bias in the guideline development process as a whole has been minimised. The editorial group for this guideline was as follows:Dr James Beattie Royal College of General PractitionersProfessor Chris Kelnar Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health Chair of SIGN; Co-editorProfessor Gordon Lowe SIGN Programme Director; Co-editorDr Safia Qureshi Director of SIGN; Co-editorDr Sara Twaddle Royal College of RadiologistsDr Christine WalkerRoyal College of General Practitioners9.6 	ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSSIGN  is  grateful  to  the  following  individuals  who  have  acted  as  advisors  to  the  guideline development group:Dr Tom BeattieDirector of Accident and Emergency, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh Dr Barry Corkey Senior Dental Officer, NHS Fife Dr Alexandra GreeneHealth Anthropologist, University of St AndrewsSIGN is also grateful to the following former members of the guideline development group who have contributed to the development of this guideline:Dr Anne-Lise Dickie Community Learning Disability Nurse, Edinburgh Dr Rod GibsonConsultant Neuroradiologist, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh Ms Doune WeaverLay Representative, Menstrie10 	Implementation and audit10.1  	LOCAL IMPLEMENTATION ?Implementation of national clinical guidelines is the responsibility of each NHS Board and is an essential part of clinical governance. It is acknowledged that every Board cannot implement every guideline immediately on publication, but mechanisms should be in place to ensure that the care provided is reviewed against the guideline recommendations and the reasons for any differences assessed and, where appropriate, addressed. These discussions should involve both clinical staff and management. Local arrangements may then be made to implement the national guideline in individual hospitals, units and practices, and to monitor compliance. This may be done  by  a  variety  of  means  including  patient-specific  reminders,  continuing  education  and training, and clinical audit. 10.2  	KEY POINTS FOR AUDIT             Diagnosis       * Percentage of children with suspected epilepsy seen by epilepsy specialist* Percentage of children with epilepsy having a syndromic diagnosis* Percentage of children with epilepsy having a seizure classification.            Investigative Procedures      * Percentage of children with epilepsy having a 12 lead ECG where the presentation has been a convulsive episode* Percentage of children with recurrent epileptic seizures having an EEG recording. Management* Percentage of children with epilepsy having referral to a tertiary specialist where two drugs have been trialed in adequate dosages over a six month period* Percentage of children with epilepsy having written information on their condition * Percentage of children with epilepsy having restrictions placed on school or leisure activities?* Percentage of schools offered epilepsy awareness training and written epilepsy information.Antiepileptic drug therapy* Percentage of children with epilepsy having evidence of communication about adverse effects of medication* Percentage of children with epilepsy having evidence of discussion regarding fetal risks in epilepsy with teenage girls and families.Status epilepticus* Percentage of children with CSE whose treatment has deviated from hospital CSE protocol. Behaviour and learning* Percentage of children with epilepsy whose academic progress has been documented. Models of care* Percentage of children with epilepsy having evidence of a written care plan?* Percentage of children with epilepsy offered access to an epilepsy nurse specialist.Other auditsThe British Paediatric Neurology Association publishes an audit toolbox which contains several audits for children with suspected epilepsy (www.bpna.org.uk/audit/).10.3 	RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RESEARCH* Competency assessment for epilepsy specialists* Effectiveness of specialist young persons clinics* Switching between branded/generic medicines* Interventions to improve adherence and concordance* Pros/cons of discussion of SUDEP and its timing with families* Head to head comparator trials of AEDs in specific epilepsy syndromes* Standardised quality of life studies* Methods of obtaining sleep for EEG* Relationship between rage attacks and epilepsies.10.4 RESOURCE IMPLICATIONSThis section is based on discussions with the guideline development group regarding current resource use in Scotland and the likely impact of implementation of the recommendations of the guideline. Where current practice will not change as a result of the recommendations, it is unlikely that there will be resource implications.The  following  table  shows  recommendations  that  are  likely  to  have  significant  resource implications if implemented across Scotland. This does not consider the resource implications associated with good practice points, although it is recognised that these may be significant.RecommendationLikely resource implicationThe diagnosis of epilepsy should be made by a paediatric neurologist or paediatrician with expertise in childhood epilepsy.Many of the 500-800 children diagnosed annually in Scotland are diagnosed in general hospital and community paediatric services. Full implementation of this recommendation will require the identification of the group of paediatricians with expertise in childhood epilepsy. This group may have immediate and ongoing professional development needs. There may be further impact on numbers of paediatric neurologists in Scotland.D Most children with epilepsy should have an elective MRI brain scan. Children with the following epilepsy syndromes (which are following a typical course) do not need brain imaging:* idiopathic (primary) generalised epilepsies (eg  childhood absence epilepsy, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy or juvenile absence epilepsy)* benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (benign rolandic epilepsy).MRI facilities are increasingly available within district general hospitals (DGHs) in Scotland. Availability of specialists to interpret the MRI is more limited – this recommendation has resource implications in terms of training and sharing of specialist skills between DGHs across NHSScotland.D Each epilepsy team should include paediatric epilepsy nurse specialists.Scotland currently has 5 epilepsy nurse specialists. To fully meet the needs of the 5,000-7,000 children in Scotland will require significant increases in the numbers of nurses, including training and ongoing administrative support for these posts.
Annex 1Epilepsy syndromesIn addition to the classification by extent of the spread of the affected neurones in the brain (focal and general), epilepsy is also classified by syndrome or grouped according to a set of common characteristics, such as the following:       Patient age?       Type of seizure or seizures       Whether a cause is known or not (idiopathic).       The following table shows an example of a classification of epilepsy syndromes.	GROUPS OF SYNDROMESSPECIFIC SYNDROMESIdiopathic focal epilepsies of infancy and childhood* Benign infantile seizures (nonfamilial) * Benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes?* Early-onset benign childhood occipital epilepsy (Panayiotopoulos type)?* Late-onset childhood occipital epilepsy(Gastaut type)Familial (autosomal dominant) focal epilepsies* Benign familial neonatal seizures?* Benign familial infantile seizures?* Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy?* Familial temporal lobe epilepsy * Familial focal epilepsy with variable fociSymptomatic and probably symptomatic focal epilepsies* Limbic epilepsieso Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with ?hippocampal sclerosis o Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy ?defined by specific etiologies o Other types defined by location ?and etiology?* Neocortical epilepsies o Rasmussen syndrome o Hemiconvulsion-hemiplegia ?syndrome o Migrating partial seizures of early ?infancy o Other types defined by location and etiology Idiopathic generalized epilepsies* Benign myoclonic epilepsy in infancy* Epilepsy with myoclonic astatic seizures * Childhood absence epilepsies?* Epilepsy with myoclonic absences?* Idiopathic generalized epilepsies with variable phenotypeso Juvenile absence epilepsy o Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy o Epilepsy with generalized tonic- clonic seizures only ?(eg GTCS on awakening)?* Generalized epilepsies with febrile ?seizures plus* ?Reflex epilepsies* Idiopathic photosensitive occipital lobe epilepsy ?* Other visual sensitive epilepsies * Primary reading epilepsy?* Startle epilepsy?* Other reflex epilepsies Epileptic encephalopathies (in which the epileptiform abnormalities may contribute to progressive dysfunction)* Early myoclonic encephalopathy?* Ohtahara syndrome?* West’s syndrome?* Dravet syndrome (previously known as ?severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy) * Myoclonic status in nonprogressive ?encephalopathies*?* Lennox-Gastaut syndrome?* Landau-Kleffner syndrome?* Epilepsy with continuous spike-waves ?during slow-wave sleepProgressive myoclonus epilepsiesSee Annex 2Seizures not necessarily requiring a diagnosis of epilepsy* Benign neonatal seizures?* Febrile seizures?* Reflex seizures?* Alcohol-withdrawal seizures * Drug or other chemically ?induced seizures?* Immediate and early post traumatic ?seizures?* Single seizures or isolated clusters ?of seizures?* Rarely repeated seizures (oligoepilepsy)* Syndrome in developmentAdapted from: Engel J Jr. A Proposed Diagnostic Scheme for People with Epileptic Seizures and with Epilepsy: Report of the ILAE Task Force on Classification and Terminology. Epilepsia 2001; 42(6):796-803.
Annex 2Non-epileptic paroxysmal disordersINFANTS: AGE 2 MONTHS TO 2 YEARSStiff baby/hyperekplexia Cyanotic and pallid breath-holding spells, reflex anoxic seizure, reflex asystolic syncope Shuddering attacks?Paroxysmal torticollis Extrapyramidal drug reactions, dystonia?Sandifer syndrome?Stereotypies Constipation Infantile gratification disorder?Fabricated and induced illness?Spasmus nutans?Benign paroxysmal vertigo?Benign myoclonus of early infancy?Alternating hemiplegia of childhood?Sleep disorders* Rhythmic movement sleep onset disorder * Benign neonatal sleep myoclonusCHILDHOOD: AGE 2-12 YEARSCyanotic and pallid breath-holding spells, reflex anoxic seizure, reflex asystolic syncope Syncope?Migraine and migraine equivalents?Recurrent abdominal painCyclic vomiting Benign paroxysmal vertigo?Tics?Paroxysmal torticollis Paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis Sandifer syndrome Dystonic drug reactions?Constipation Stereotypics and daydreaming Infantile gratification disorder Fabricated and induced illness Pseudoseizures?Sleep disorders* Rhythmic movement sleep onset disorder * Night terrors?* Sleep walking?* Talking in your sleep* NarcolepsyADOLESCENT AGE GROUP: 12 YEARS TO ADULTSyncope?Migraine and variants Psychogenic seizures Movement disorders Paroxysmal kinesiogenic choreoathetosisParoxysmal dystonic choreoathetosisParoxysmal hereditary ataxias?Tremor?Tics?Transient global amnesia?Sleep disorders* Nocturnal myoclonus, hypnic jerks * Night terrors?* Sleep walking?* Talking in your sleep* NarcolepsyADDITIONAL NON-EPILEPTIC EVENTS IN CHILDREN WITH LEARNING DIFFICULTIESSelf stimulationHyperventilationStereotypiesSandifer syndromeSpasticityClonus Headache/Pain Dystonic posturing ChoreoathetosisAdapted from: Paolicchi JM. The spectrum of nonepileptic events in children. Epilepsia. 2002;43 Suppl 3:60-4.
Annex 3Calculation of corrected Qt intervalThe duration of the QT interval is a measure of the time required for ventricular depolarization and repolarization to occur. It is measured, on an ECG trace, from the initiation of the Q wave of the QRS complex to where the T wave returns to isoelectric baseline.Because  of  its  inverse  relationship  to  heart  rate,  the  QT  interval  is  routinely  transformed (normalized) into a heart rate independent “corrected” value known as the QTc interval. This can  be  achieved  either  by  using  Bazett’s  formula  or  by  reading  off  the  QTc  value  from  a nomogram (see below).Bazett’s formula:              Normal value:<0.44 seconds        Indeterminate:0.44 – 0.49 seconds        Abnormal: >0.49 secondsIf ECG paper speed is at 25 mm/second use the nomogram below:This nomogram indicates when the QTc is in one of three ranges. If the QTc is above the lower line (QTc >/= 0.44) a 12-lead ECG is suggested.Adapted from: Information for pediatric neurologists - evaluating the child with syncope or first seizure for Long QT syndrome by measuring the corrected QT interval on EEG. [cited 5 December 2004]. Available from url: http://home.gwi.net/seahorsepress/hopepage.htm
Annex 4The use of unlicensed medicines or licensed medicines for unlicensed applications in paediatric practicePolicy  statement  produced  by  the  joint  RCPCH/NPPG  Standing  Committee  on  Medicines (February 2000)This statement has been drawn up by the Standing Committee on Medicines, a joint committee of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health and the Neonatal and Paediatric Pharmacists Group. It aims to inform and guide health professionals and parents who prescribe, dispense or administer medicines for children, and health service managers who have a responsibility to support them. The statement forms part of the introduction to Medicines for Children, the first national paediatric formulary offering guidance on the use of therapeutic drugs given to children.* The recommendations of the Committee are that:* Those who prescribe for a child should choose the medicine which offers the best prospect of benefit for that child, with due regard to cost.* The  informed  use  of  some  unlicensed  medicines  or  licensed  medicines  for  unlicensed applications is necessary in paediatric practice.* Health professionals should have ready access to sound information on any medicine they prescribe, dispense or administer, and its availability.* In general, it is not necessary to take additional steps, beyond those taken when prescribing licensed medicines, to obtain the consent of parents, carers and child patients to prescribe or administer unlicensed medicines or licensed medicines for unlicensed applications.* NHS Trusts and Health Authorities should support therapeutic practices that are advocated by a respectable, responsible body of professional opinion.LICENSING1. For a medicine to be marketed in the United Kingdom it must have received a Product Licence, now called a marketing authorisation. It is then said to be licensed. Many medicines that are given to children are not licensed for the particular indication, age of the child, suitable formulation, or route of administration. This position arises when a pharmaceutical company has made an application to the Licensing Authority for a marketing authorisation for use of the medicine in adults, but chooses not to make an application for the use of that medicine in particular ways in children. Certain medicines that are given to children have not received a licence for any indication, and are said to be unlicensed. 2. The  use  of  unlicensed  medicines  or  licensed  medicines  for  unlicensed  applications  is necessary in paediatric practice when there is no suitable alternative. Such uses are informed and guided by a respectable and responsible body of professional opinion. 3. The Medicines Act and Regulations (which incorporate the relevant EC directives) provide exemptions which enable doctors to: * prescribe unlicensed medicines;?* use in particular (named) patients, unlicensed products specially prepared, imported or supplied;?* use medicines which are not authorised to be marketed, in clinical trials, after approval of  the  trial  by  the  Medicines  Control  Agency  (MCA)  either  through  the  Doctors  and Dentists  Exemption  Scheme  or,  in  the  case  of  pharmaceutical  industry  sponsorship, through the Trials Certificate (Exemption) Scheme;* use or advise the use of licensed medicines for indications, or in doses, or by routes of administration, outside the recommendations of the licence;* override the warnings and the precautions given in the licence.4. In each case, the doctor has to be able to justify the action taken as being in accordance with a respectable, responsible body of professional opinion.The informed use of unlicensed medicines or of licensed medicines for unlicensed applications is necessary in paediatric practice.SOURCES OF INFORMATION5. Although the choice of a medicine is not necessarily determined by its licence status, it will  take  account  of  information  made  available  as  a  consequence  of  licensing  and contained  in  the  marketing  authorisation.  When  the  Product  Licence  does  not  include indications for use in children, the marketing authorisation is of limited help. When the medicine is unlicensed, the necessary information must be sought elsewhere. It often is available, though might not be readily accessible. 6. To  meet  the  need  for  accessible  sound  information  and  guidance  the  Committee  has undertaken the preparation of a new formulary, Medicines for Children. The standing of its contributors and of those who undertake independent review will ensure that it is an authoritative statement of paediatric therapeutic practice in this country. INFORMATION FOR OTHER HEALTH PROFESSIONALS AND THE PUBLIC7. Parents,  patients  and  teachers,  and  others  in  loco  parentis,  require  information  about medicines from health professionals, including general practitioners, paediatricians, nurses, health  visitors,  and  pharmacists.  The  information  must  be  given  in  a  way  they  can understand,  and  be  accurate  and  consistent.  This  is  particularly  important  when  the specialist  who  has  advised  the  use  of  unlicensed  medicines  or  licensed  medicines  for unlicensed  applications,  hands  over  the  care  of  the  patient  and  responsibility  for  the administration of the medicine to someone else. Given the complexity of therapeutic and pharmacological  information,  and  the  burdens  upon  those  giving  and  receiving  it,  the need is for sound, practical and sensible arrangements for communication, supplemented by readily available sources of reference.It is essential that health professionals should have ready access to sound information on any medicine they prescribe, dispense or administer, and on its availability.CONSENT OF PARENTS, CARERS AND PATIENTS8. Health professionals must respect the right of child patients and their parents to participate in decisions on the health care of the child, and seek to ensure that those decisions are properly informed. In normal paediatric practice no additional steps, beyond those taken when prescribing licensed medicines, are required to obtain the consent of patients and parents/carers for the use of unlicensed medicines. 9. Clinicians are anxious that the licence status of a drug should not be perceived as reflecting what is or is not best for the child. They are mindful of a possible impact upon the confidence of parents and patients who might then be reluctant to accept advice, with consequences for a child who might not receive a medicine that offers benefit. 10. Most licensed medicines are dispensed in standard packages together with a Patient Information Leaflet (PIL) approved by the Licensing Authority. When the licence does not include indications for children, the PIL may caution against such use. Naturally, this may undermine confidence in the advice given by health professionals, besides provoking a call  for  explanation.  The  Committee  has  produced  two  generic  PILs,  for  patients  and parents/carers  respectively,  which  explains  why  it  may  be  necessary  to  prescribe unlicensed medicines or to use licensed medicines for unlicensed applications. This leaflet will be made widely available to hospitals and pharmacies and may be of practical value in such situations. 11. There are circumstances when a clinician will decide to give fuller information than is usually judged necessary. These may arise when a medicine is new or experimental; or carries  known  or  possible  risks  of  harm,  even  if  those  risks  are  small  in  relation  to  the disorder to be treated; or when the concerns of some parents, carers or patients generate a need for more detailed discussion and explanation on the medicines that are prescribed. In each instance, practice is guided by clinical judgement. We consider that in general it is not necessary to take additional steps, beyond those taken when prescribing licensed medicines,  to  obtain  the  consent  of  parents,  carers  and  child  patients  to  prescribe  or administer unlicensed medicines or licensed medicines for unlicensed applications.POLICIES OF NHS TRUSTS12. Some NHS Trusts have suggested that a clinician should not use an unlicensed medicine, or  a  licensed  medicine  for  unlicensed  application.  In  1993  the  Department  of  Health stated that it would not expect that a health authority would seek to fetter a clinician’s freedom to prescribe by expressly directing its medical staff against prescribing unlicensed products or licensed products for unlicensed purposes. The Department of Health’s lawyers also  stated  that,  should  a  health  authority  so  direct  its  medical  staff,  a  court  would  be reluctant to support the authority in those circumstances. 13. However the emphasis on risk management and evidence based medicine in Clinical Governance’s  framework  implies  that  Trusts  may  be  encouraged  to  introduce  systems and  protocols  to  monitor,  and  even  direct,  the  use  of  both  licensed  and  unlicensed medicines. We understand that, because the Medicines Act’s (1968) exemptions remain current,  the  courts  would  not  hold  the  prescription  of  an  unlicensed  medicine  to  be  a breach of the duty of care, if that treatment was supported by a respected body of medical opinion. The best evidence available should always inform the prescription of medicines for children. We consider that NHS Trusts should support therapeutic practices that are advocated by a respectable, responsible body of professional opinion.REFERENCESBritish Paediatric Association. A paediatrician’s guide to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. London: British Paediatric Association, 1995.A Report of the Joint Working Party of the British Paediatric Association and the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry. Licensing Medicines for Children. London: Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, 1996.The  General  Medical  Council.  Good  Medical  Practice.  London: The General Medical Council, 1998.The General Medical Council. Seeking patients. Consent: the ethical considerations. London: The General Medical Council, 1999.Department  of  Health.  Letter  to  the  President,  British  Paediatric  Association,  3  November 1993. Department of Health.Joint Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health and the Neonatal and Paediatric Pharmacists Group Standing Committee on Medicines. Information for older children. 2000. [cited on 3 February  2005]  Available  from  url:  www.rcpch.ac.uk/publications/formulary_medicines/ Patient_Information_One.pdfJoint Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health and the Neonatal and Paediatric Pharmacists Group Standing Committee on Medicines. Information for patients and carers. 2000. [cited on 3  February  2005]  Available  from  url:  www.rcpch.ac.uk/publications/formulary_medicines/ Patient_Information_Two.pdf
Annex 5Diseases frequently associated with epileptic seizuresGROUPS OF DISEASESSPECIFIC DISEASESProgressive myoclonic epilepsiesCeroid lipofuscionosis?Sialidosis?Lafora disease?Unverricht-Lundborg disease Neuroaxonal dystrophy Myoclonic Epilepsy with Ragged Red Fibres (MERRF) Dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) OtherNeurocutaneous disordersTuberous sclerosis complex Neurofibromatosis Hypomelanosis of Ito Epidermal nevus syndrome Sturge–Weber syndromeMalformations due to abnormal cortical developmentsIsolated lissencephaly sequence Miller–Dieker syndrome X-linked lissencephaly Subcortical band heterotopia Periventricular nodular heterotopia Focal heterotopia Hemimegalencephaly Bilateral perisylvian syndrome Unilateral polymicrogyria Schizencephalies Focal or multifocal cortical dysplasia MicrodysgenesisOther cerebral malformationsAicardi syndrome Progressive Encephalopathy with Hypsarrthrhythmia and Optic atrophy (PEHO) syndromeAcrocallosal syndrome?OtherTumoursDysembyroblastic Neuro Epithelial Tumour (DNET)?Gangliocytoma?Ganglioglioma Cavernous angiomasAstrocytomas Hypothalamic hamartoma (with gelastic seizures) OtherChromosomal abnormalitiesPartial monosomy 4P or Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome Trisomy 12p Inversion duplication 15 syndrome Ring 20 chromosomeOtherMonogenic mendelian diseases with complex pathogenetic mechanismsFragile X syndrome Angelman syndrome Rett syndromeOtherInherited metabolic disordersNon-ketotic hyperglycinaemiaD-Glyceric acidaemiaPropionic acidaemiaSulphite-oxidase deficiencyFructose 1-6 diphosphatase deficiencyOther organic acidurias Pyridoxine dependencyAminoacidopathies (maple syrup urine disease, phenylketonuria, other)Urea cycle disordersDisorders of carbohydrate metabolismDisorders of biotin metabolismDisorders of folic acid and B12 metabolismGlucose transport protein deficiencyMenkes’ diseaseGlycogen-storage disordersKrabbe diseaseFumarase deficiencyPeroxisomal disordersSanfilippo syndromeMitochondrial diseases (pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, respiratory chain defects, Mitochondrial Encephalopathy with Lactic Acidosis and Stroke-like episodes; MELAS)Adapted from: Engel J Jr. A Proposed Diagnostic Scheme for People with Epileptic Seizures and with Epilepsy: Report of the ILAE Task Force on Classification and Terminology. Epilepsia 2001; 42(6):796-803.
Annex 6GlossaryAdherence – the extent to which a person’s behaviour – taking medication, following a diet, and/or executing lifestyle changes, corresponds with agreed recommendations from a healthcare providerBioavailability - In pharmacology, bioavailability is a term used to describe a pharmacokinetic property of drugs, namely, the fraction of a dose which reaches the systemic circulationConcordance  –  this  term  is  intended  to  convey  a  respect  for  the  aims  of  both  the  health professional and the patient and signifies a negotiated agreement between the twoConvulsion – seizure characterized by marked motor activity eg jerking and or stiffness, may be epileptic or non-epilepticCryptogenic epilepsy syndrome – a syndrome which is believed to be symptomatic but no aetiology identifiedEpilepsy – a condition characterised by recurrent epileptic seizures Epilepsy syndrome – A group of signs and symptoms that collectively define or characterize aspecific epileptic disease or disorderEpileptic encephalopathy – a condition in which the epileptiform abnormalities themselves are believed to contribute to the progressive disturbance in cerebral functionEpileptic seizure – a clinical manifestation of epileptic (excessive and/or hypersynchronous), usually self limiting, activity of neurones in the brainFebrile seizures (febrile convulsions) – a seizure occurring in children after one month of age, associated with febrile illness not caused by infection of the central nervous system, without previous neonatal seizures or a previous unprovoked seizure, and not meeting the criteria for other symptomatic seizuresComplex febrile seizures are focal, prolonged (15 min) or recurrent within 24 hours or associated with post-ictal neurological impairmentsFocal (previously “partial”) seizure – an epileptic seizure whose initial semiology indicates initial activation of only part of the cerebral hemisphereGeneralised seizure – an epileptic seizure whose initial semiology indicates more than minimal involvement of both cerebral hemispheresIdiopathic epilepsy syndrome – a syndrome that is only epilepsy, with no underlying structural brain lesion or other neurological signs or symptomsInter-ictal – between seizures Seizure – paroxysmal disturbance of brain function that may be epileptic, syncopal (anoxic) or due to other mechanismsSemiology – initial symptoms, signs and their sequenceSpecialist – a paediatrician with further training and expertise in the epilepsiesStatus Epilepticus – describes a situation where there is recurrent or continuous seizure activity lasting longer than 30 minutes during which the person does not regain consciousnessSymptomatic epilepsy syndrome – a syndrome in which the epileptic seizures are the result of one or more identifiable structural lesions of the brainSyncopal seizure – an anoxic seizure resulting from syncopeSyncope – transient loss of consciousness due to a sudden decrease in cerebral perfusion of oxygenated blood
Annex 7Example treatment protocol for an acute tonic-clonic convulsion in a hospital setting including established convulsive status epilepticusAdapted from: Appleton R, Choonara I, Martland T, Phillips B, Scott R, Whitehouse W. The treatment of convulsive status epilepticus in children. The Status Epilepticus Working Party, Members of the Status Epilepticus Working Party. Arch Dis Child. 2000 Nov;83(5):415-9.
Annex 8Useful contact detailsThis annex contains contact details for organisations which provide different levels of support and further information for patients and carers.David Lewis Centre for EpilepsyMill Lane, Warford, Alderley Edge, Cheshire SK9 7UD Tel: 01565 640 000Enlighten – Action for Epilepsy5 Coates Place, Edinburgh EH3 7AA Tel:  0131 226 5458Fax: 0131 220 2855 Email: info@enlighten.org.ukWebsite: www.enlighten.org.ukEpilepsy ActionNew Anstey House, Gate Way Drive, Yeadon,  Leeds LS19 7XY Helpline: 0808 800 5050 Fax: 0808 800 5555 Email: helpline@epilepsy.org.uk Website: www.epilepsy.org.ukEpilepsy BereavedPO Box 112, Wantage, Oxon OX12 8XT 24 hour contact line: 01235 772852 Tel: 01235 772850 Website: http://dspace.dial.pipex.com/epilepsybereaved/eb/call/index.htmEpilepsy Connections100 Wellington Street, Glasgow G2 6DH Tel: 0141 248 4125Fax: 0141 248 5887Website: www.epilepsyconnections.org.ukEpilepsy Scotland48 Govan Road, Glasgow G51 1JLHelpline: 0808 800 2200Fax: 0141 419 1709Email: enquiries@epilepsyscotland.org.ukWebsite: www.epilepsyscotland.org.ukJoint Epilepsy Council of the UK and IrelandTel: 01943 871 852 Website: www.jointepilepsycouncil.org.ukNational Association for Welfare of Children in HospitalsAction for Sick Children (Scotland) 172 Leith Walk, Edinburgh EH6 5EA Tel: 0131 553 6553 Website: www.actionforsickchildren.orgNational Centre for Young People with Epilepsy (NCPYE)St Piers Lane, Lingfield, Surrey RH7 6PW Tel: 01342 832 243 Website: www.ncype.org.ukNational Society for EpilepsyChesham Lane, Chalfont St Peter, Bucks SL9 ORJ Helpline: 01494  601 400 û Tel: 01494  601 300 û Fax: 01494 871 1927 Website: www.epilepsynse.org.ukQuarriersQuarriers Village, Bridge of Weir, Renfrewshire PA11 3SX Tel: 01505 616000Fax: 01505 613906 Email: enquiries@quarriers.org.ukWebsite: www.quarriers.org.uk
AbbreviationsA&EAccident and Emergency?ADHD Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder?AED Antiepileptic Drug?BECTS Benign Childhood Epilepsy with Centrotemporal Spikes CSE Convulsive Status Epilepticus?CT Computed Tomography?DGH District General Hospital?ECG Electrocardiogram?EEG Electroencephalogram?ESES Electrical Status Epilepticus during Sleep?GP General Practitioner?MHRA Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging?NCC-PCNCSE Non-convulsive Status Epilepticus?NICE National Institute for Clinical Excellence?NPPG Neonatal and Paediatric Pharmacists Group?PIL Patient Information Leaflet?QTc Corrected QT Interval?RCPCHRoyal College of Paediatrics and Child Health?RCT Randomised Controlled Trial?SIGN Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network?SSRI Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor?SUDEP Sudden Unexpected Death in Epilepsy
References1 Information and Statistics Division. Acute hospital (non-obstetric, non psychiatric) inpatient and day case discharges for patients aged less than 20 with a main diagnosis of epilepsy:  years ending 31 December 2001  to  2003.  [unpublished  data]  Edinburgh:  The  Division;  2003. [cited 6 January 2005]. 2 Forsgren L.  Incidence and prevalence. In: Wallace S, Farrell K, editors. Epilepsy in Children.  2nd ed. London: Arnold, 2004. 3 Shinnar S, Pellock JM, Moshe SL, Maytal J, O’Dell C, Driscoll SM, et al. In whom does status epilepticus occur: age-related differences in children. Epilepsia. 1997;38(8):907-14. 4 Aicardi  J,  Chevrie  JJ.  Convulsive  status  epilepticus  in  infants  and children. A study of 239 cases. Epilepsia. 1970;11(2):187-97. 5 Scottish  Intercollegiate  Guidelines  Network  (SIGN).  Diagnosis  and ?management of adults with epilepsy. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2003. (SIGN ?publication no. 70). 6 Guidelines  for  epidemiologic  studies  on  epilepsy.  Commission  on ?Epidemiology and Prognosis, International League Against Epilepsy. ?Epilepsia. 1993;34:592-6. 7 Engel J Jr. A Proposed Diagnostic Scheme for People with Epileptic ?Seizures  and  with  Epilepsy:  Report  of  the  ILAE  Task  Force  on ?Classification and Terminology. Epilepsia 2001; 42(6):796-803. 8 Kellinghaus  C,  Loddenkemper  T,  Najm  I,  Wyllie,  E,  Lineweaver  T, Nair D, et al. Specific Epileptic Syndromes Are Rare Even in Tertiary Epilepsy  Centers:  A  Patient-oriented  Approach  to  Epilepsy ?Classification. Epilepsia 2004; 45(3):268-275. 9 Armon K, Stephenson T, Gabriel V, MacFaul R, Eccleston P, Werneke ?U, et al. Determining the common medical presenting problems to an  accident  and  emergency  department.  Arch  Dis  Child. 2001;84(5):390-2. 10 Baumer  JH,  David  TJ,  Valentine  SJ,  Roberts  JE,  Hughes  BR.  Many parents think their child is dying when having a first febrile convulsion. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1981;23(4):462-4. 11 Armon K, Stephenson T, MacFau R, Hemingway P, Wernecke U, Smith S. An evidence based guideline for the management of a child after a seizure. Emerg Med J. 2003;20(1):13-20. 12 Advanced Life Support Group. Advanced paediatric life support: the practical approach. 3rd ed. London:BMJ Publishing;2001. 13 Ross EM, Peckham CS, West PB, Butler NR. Epilepsy in childhood: findings  from  the  National  Child  Development  Study.  BMJ 1980;280(6209):207-10. 14 Lempert  T.    Syncope.  Phenomenology  and  differentiation  from epileptic seizures. Nervenarzt 1997; 68: 620-4. 15 Independent  Review  of  paediatric  neurology  services:  Leicester. London:Department  of  Health;2003.  [cited  on  9  September  2004] Available  from  URL:    http://www.go-em.gov.uk/health/documents/ epilepsyreviewfinal.pdf 16 Stephenson JB. Fits and faints. London:McKeith Press;1990. 17 Scheepers  B,  Clough  P,  Pickles  C.  The  misdiagnosis  of  epilepsy: ?findings of a population study. Seizure. 1998;7(5):403-6. 18 Metrick ME, Ritter FJ, Gates JR, Jacobs MP, Skare SS, Loewenson RB. ?Nonepileptic events in childhood. Epilepsia. 1991;32:322-8. 19 Jeavons  PM.  Non-epileptic  attacks  in  childhood.  In:  Rose  FC,  ed. ?Research progress in epilepsy. London:Pitman;1983. 20 Bye  AME,  Kok  DJM,  Ferenschild  FTJ,  Vles  JSH.  Paroxysmal  non- epileptic events in children: a retrospective study over a period of 10 ?years. J Paediatr Child Health 2000;36:244-248. 21 Stroink  H,  van  Donselaar  CA,  Geerts  AT,  Peters  AC,  Brouwer  OF, ?Arts  WF.  The  accuracy  of  the  diagnosis  of  paroxysmal  events  in ?children. Neurology. 2003;60(6):979-82. 22 Consensus  Conference  -  better  care  for  children  and  adults  with ?epilepsy. J R CollPhysicians Edinb. 33;2003:(Suppl 11). 23 Mannan JB, Wieshmann UC. How accurate are witness descriptions ?of epileptic seizures? Seizure. 2003;12:444-447. 24 Rugg-Gunn, F. J., N. A. Harrison, et al. Evaluation of the accuracy of ?seizure descriptions by the relatives of patients with epilepsy. Epilepsy ?Res 2001;43(3):193-9. 25 Rosenow F, Wyllie E, Kotagal P, Mascha E, Wolgamuth BR, Hamer ?H.  Staring  spells  in  children:  descriptive  features  distinguishing ?epileptic and nonepileptic events. J Pediatr. 1998;133(5):660-3. 26 Carmant L, Kramer U, Holmes GL, Mikati MA, Riviello JJ, Helmers SL. Differential diagnosis of staring spells in children: a video-EEG ?study. Pediatr Neurol. 1996;14(3):199-202. 27 Woody RC. Home videorecording of “spells” in children. Pediatrics. ?1985;76(4):612-3. 28 Sheth  RD,  Bodensteiner  JB.  Effective  utilization  of  home-video ?recordings for the evaluation of paroxysmal events in pediatrics.Clin Pediatr 1994;33:578-82. 29 Flink R, Pedersen B, Guekht AB, Malmgren K, Michelucci R, Neville B, et al. Commission of European Affairs of the International League Against Epilepsy: Subcommission on European Guidelines. Guidelines for the use of EEG methodology in the diagnosis of epilepsy. International League Against Epilepsy: commission report. Commission on European Affairs: Subcommission on European Guidelines. Acta Neurol Scand. 2002;106(1):1-7. 30 Smith D, Defalla BA, Chadwick DW. The misdiagnosis of epilepsy and the management of refractory epilepsy in a specialist clinic. QJM. 1999;92(1):15- 23. 31 Benbadis SR, Tatum WO. Overintepretation of EEGs and misdiagnosis of epilepsy. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2003;20(1):42-4. 32 Fowle AJ, Binnie CD. Uses and abuses of the EEG in epilepsy. Epilepsia 2000; 41(Suppl 3) S10-8. 33 King MA, Newton MR, Jackson GD, Fitt GJ, Mitchell LA, Silvapulle MJ  et  al.  Epileptology  of  the  first-seizure  presentation:  a  clinical, electroencephalographic, and magnetic resonance imaging study of 300 consecutive patients. Lancet. 1998;352(9133):1007-11. 34 Carpay JA, de Weerd AW, Schimsheimer RJ, Stroink H, Brouwer OF, Peters  AC,  et  al.  The  diagnostic  yield  of  a  second  EEG  after  partial sleep  deprivation:  a  prospective  study  in  children  with  newly diagnosed seizures. Epilepsia. 1997;38(5):595-9. 35 Ajmone  Marsan  C,  Zivin  LS.  Factors  relating  to  the  occurrence  of typical  paroxysmal  abnormalities  in  the  EEG  records  of  epileptic patients. Epilepsia. 1970;11:361-381. 36 Eeg-Olofsson  O.  The  development  of  the  electroencephalogram  in normal children and adolescents from the age of 1 through 21 years. Acta Paediatr Scand 1971;(Suppl 208):1-46. 37 Cavazzuti GB, Cappella L, Nalin A. Longitudinal study of epileptiform EEG patterns in normal children. Epilepsia. 1980;21(1):43-55. 38 Reuber M, Fernandez G, Bauer J, Singh DD, Elger CE. Interictal EEG ?abnormalities  in  patients  with  psychogenic  nonepileptic  seizures. ?Epilepsia. 2002;43(9):1013-20. 39 Okubo Y, Matsuura M, Asai T, Asai K, Kato M, Kojima T and Toru M. ?Epileptiform  EEG  discharges  in  healthy  children:  prevalence, emotional  and  behavioural  correlates,  and  genetic  influences. Epilepsia. 1994;35(4):832-841. 40 Zivin  L,  Marsan  CA.  Incidence  and  prognostic  significance  of “epileptiform”  activity  in  the  EEG  of  non-epileptic  subjects.  Brain. 1968;91(4):751-78. 41 Panteliadis C, Jacobi G, Covanis A, Tzitiridou M, Kotzaeridou U, Arsos G,  Kardaras  P.  Epilepsy  in  children  with  congenital  hemiplegia: correlation between clinical, EEG and neuroimaging findings. Epileptic Disord. 2002;4(4):251-5. 42 Autret A, Lucas B, Degiovanni E, de Toffol B, Billard C. A note on the occurrence  of  unusual  electroencephalographic  sleep  patterns  in selected normal children. J Child Neurol 1992;7:422-426. 43 Doppelbauer A, Zeitlhofer J, Zifko U, Baumgartner C, Mayr N, Deecke L. Occurrence of epileptiform activity in the routine EEG of epileptic patients. Acta Neurol Scand. 1993;87(5):345-52. 44 Shinnar S, Berg AT, Moshe SL, O’Dell C, Alemany M, Newstein D, et al.  The  risk  of  seizure  recurrence  after  a  first  unprovoked  afebrile seizure in childhood: an extended follow-up. Pediatrics. 1996;98(2 Pt 1):216-25. 45 Gilles FH, Sobel E, Leviton A, Hedley-Whyte ET, Tavare CJ, Adelman LS, et al. Epidemiology of seizures in children with brain tumors. The Childhood  Brain  Tumor  Consortium.  J  Neurooncol. 1992;12(1):53-68. 46 Musicco M, Beghi E, Solari A, Viani F. Treatment of first tonic-clonic seizure does not improve the prognosis of epilepsy. First Seizure Trial Group. Neurology 1997; 49: 991-8. 47 Knudsen  FU  Febrile  seizures:  treatment  and  prognosis.  Epilepsia. 2000;41(1):2-9. 48 Maytal J, Steele R, Eviatar L, Novak G. The value of early postictal EEG  in  children  with  complex  febrile  seizures.  Epilepsia. 2000;41(2):219-21. 49 Duncan  JS.  Antiepileptic  drugs  and  the  electroencephalogram. Epilepsia. 1987;28(3):259-66. 50 Livingston JH, Anderson A, Brown JK, McInnes A. Benzodiazepine sensitivity testing in the management of intractable seizure disorders in  childhood.  Electroencephalogr  Clin  Neurophysiol. 1987;67(3):197-203. 51 Dulac  O,  Plouin  P,  Jambaque  I.  Predicting  favorable  outcome  in idiopathic West syndrome. Epilepsia. 1993;34(4):747-56. 52 Kellaway P, Hrachovy RA, Frost JD Jr, Zion T. Precise characterization and quantification of infantile spasms. Ann Neurol.1979;6(3):214-8. 53 Connolly  MB,  Wong  PKH,  Karim  Y,  Smith  S,  Farrell  K.  Outpatient ?video-EEG monitoring in children. Epilepsia. 1994;35(3):477-481. 54 Penry JK, Porter RJ, Dreifuss RE. Simultaneous recording of absence seizures with video tape and electroencephalography. A study of 374 ?seizures in 48 patients. Brain. 1975;98(3):427-40. 55 Dinner  DS.  Effect  of  sleep  on  epilepsy.  J  Clin  Neurophysiol. 2002;19(6):504-13.56 Dhanuka AK, Jain BK, Daljit S, Maheshwari D. Juvenile myoclonic ?epilepsy: a clinical and sleep EEG study. Seizure. 2001;10(5):374-8. 57 Fountain NB, Kim JS, Lee SI. Sleep deprivation activates epileptiform discharges  independent  of  the  activating  effects  of  sleep.  J  Clin ?Neurophysiol. 1998;15(1):69-75. 58 Glick TH. The sleep-deprived electroencephalogram: evidence and ?practice. Arch Neurol. 2002;59(8):1235-9. 59 Gilbert  DL,  DeRoos  S,  Bare  M.  Does  sleep  or  sleep  deprivation ?increase epileptiform discharges in pediatric electroencehalograms? ?Pediatrics 2004; 114: 658-662. 60 Wassmer E, Carter PF, Quinn E, McLean N, Welsh G, Seri S, et al. ?Melatonin is useful for recording sleep EEGs: a prospective audit of ?outcome. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2001;43(11):735-8. 61 Wassmer  E,  Quinn  E,  Seri  S,  Whitehouse  W.  The  acceptability  of ?sleep-deprived electroencephalograms. Seizure. 1999;8(7):434-5. 62 Thompson JL, Ebersole JS. Long-term inpatient audiovisual scalp EEG ?monitoring. J Clin Neurophysiol. 1999;16(2):91-9. 63 Mizrahi EM. Pediatric electroencephalographic video monitoring. J ?Clin Neurophysiol. 1999;16(2):100-10. 64 Cascino  GD.  Clinical  indications  and  diagnostic  yield  of  video- ?electroencephalographic  monitoring  in  patients  with  seizures  and ?spells. Mayo Clin Proc. 2002;77(10):1111-20. 65 Del Giudice E, Crisanti AF, Romano A. Short duration outpatient video ?electroencephalographic monitoring: the experience of a southern- Italian  general  pediatric  department.  Epileptic  Disord. 2002;4(3):197-202. 66 Foley  CM,  Legido  A,  Miles  DK,  Grover  WD.  Diagnostic  value  of pediatric outpatient video-EEG. Pediatr Neurol. 1995;12(2):120-4. 67 Olson  DM.  Success  of  ambulatory  EEG  in  children.  J  Clin Neurophysiol. 2001;18(2):158-61. 68 Shihabuddin B, Abou-Khalil B, Fakhoury T. The value of combined ambulatory  cassette-EEG  and  video  monitoring  in  the  differential diagnosis  of  intractable  seizures.  Clin  Neurophysiol. 1999;110(8):1452-7. 69 Bronen RA, Fulbright RK, Spencer DD, Spencer SS, Kim JH, Lange RC, et al. Refractory epilepsy: comparison of MR imaging, CT, and histopathologic  findings  in  117  patients.  Radiology. 1996;201(1):97-105. 70 Sharma S, Riviello JJ, Harper MB, Baskin MN. The role of emergent neuroimaging in children with new-onset afebrile seizures.Pediatrics. 2003;111(1):1-5. 71 Maytal J, Krauss JM, Novak G, Nagelberg J, Patel M. The role of brain computed  tomography  in  evaluating  children  with  new  onset  of seizures in the emergency department. Epilepsia. 2000;41(8):950-4. 72 Recommendations  for  neuroimaging  of  patients  with  epilepsy. Commission  on  Neuroimaging  of  the  International  League  Against Epilepsy. Epilepsia. 1997;38(11):1255-6. 73 Wright NB. Imaging in epilepsy: a paediatric perspective. Br J Radiol. 2001;74(883):575-89. 74 Gardiner RM. Genes and epilepsy J Med Genet 1990;27:537-544. 75 75  Corey LA, Berg K, Pellock JM, Solaas MH, Nance WE, DeLorenzo RJ. The  occurrence  of  epilepsy  and  febrile  seizures  in  Virginian    and ?Norwegian twins. Neurology 1991;41:1433-1436. 76 Sillanpaa M, Kosvenzuo M, Romanov K, Kaprio J. Genetic factors in epileptic seizures: evidence from a large twin population Acta Neurol ?Scand 1991;84:523-6. 77 Kjeldsen  MJ,  Corey  LA,  Christensen  K,  Friis  ML.  Epileptic  seizures ?and syndromes in twins: the importance of genetic factors. Epilepsy ?Res 2003;55:137-146. 78 Scheffer IE, Berkovic SF. The genetics of human epilepsy. Trends in ?pharmacological sciences 2003;24:428-433. 79 Bianchi A, Viaggi S, Chiossi E, and the LICE Episcreen Group. Family ?study  of  epilepsy  in  first  degree  relatives  -  data  from  the  Italian ?Episcreen study. Seizure 2003;12:203-210. 80 Baxter P. Pyridoxine-dependent and pyridoxine-responsive seizures. ?Dev Med Child Neurol. 2001;43(6):416-20. 81 Hart  YM,  Shorvon  SD.  The  nature  of  epilepsy  in  the  general ?population. II. Medical care. Epilepsy Res 1995;21:51-8 82 82  Jain  P,  Patterson  VH,  Morrow  JI.    What  people  with  epilepsy  want ?from a hospital clinic.  Seizure 1993;2:75-8. 83 Buck  D,  Jacoby  A,  Baker  GA,  Graham-Jones  S,  Chadwick  DW. ?Patients’ experiences of and satisfaction with care for their epilepsy. ?Epilepsia 1996;37:841-9. 84 Wilde  M,  Haslam  C.  Living  with  epilepsy:  a  qualitative  study ?investigating the experiences of young people attending outpatients ?clinics in Leicester. Seizure. 1996;5(1):63-72. 85 Goldstein  LH,  Minchin  L,  Stubbs  P,  Fenwick  PB.  Are  what  people ?know about their epilepsy and what they want from a service related? ?Seizure 1997;6:435-42. 86 Choi-Kwon S, Yoon SM, Choi MR, Kang DW, Lee SK.  The difference in  perceptions  of  educational  need  between  epilepsy  patients  and medical personnel. Epilepsia 2001;42:785-9. 87 Ridsdale L, Morgan M, O’Connor C. Promoting self-care in epilepsy: the views of patients on the advice they had received from specialists, family  doctors  and  an  epilepsy  nurse.  Patient  Educ  Couns. 1999;37(1):43-7. 88 Houston EC, Cunningham CC, Metcalfe E, Newton R. The information needs  and  understanding  of  5-10-year  old  children  with  epilepsy, asthma or diabetes. Seizure. 2000;9(5):340-3.89 Aytch  LS,  Hammond  R,  White  C.  Seizures  in  infants  and  young children:  an  exploratory  study  of  family  experiences  and  needs  for information and support. J Neurosci Nurs. 2001;33(5):278-85. 90 Stewart  H,  Matthews  T,  Foley  M,  Aszkenasy  OM.  An  audit  of  care provided  for  children  with  epilepsy  in  the  South  Tees  area.  Child Care Health Dev. 1998;24(3):185-94. 91 Hightower S, Carmon M, Minick P. A qualitative descriptive study of the lived experiences of school-aged children with epilepsy. J  Pediatr Health Care. 2002;16(3):131-7.92 Kirsch  R,  Wirrell  E.  Do  cognitively  normal  children  with  epilepsy have  a  higher  rate  of  injury  than  their  nonepileptic  peers?  J  Child Neurol. 2001;16(2):100-4.?93 Wirrell  EC,  Camfield  PR,  Camfield  CS,  Dooley  JM,  Gordon  KE. Accidental  injury  is  a  serious  risk  in  children  with  typical  absence epilepsy. Arch Neurol 1996;53(9):929-32. 94 Ziegler AL, Reinberg O, Deonna T. Epilepsy and accidents: what is the risk in children?. Arch Pediatr 1994;1(9):801-5.95 Appleton  RE;  Mersey  Region  Paediatric  Epilepsy  Interest  Group. Seizure-related  injuries  in  children  with  newly  diagnosed  and untreated epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2002;43(7):764-7. 96 Kemp AM, Sibert JR. Epilepsy in children and the risk of drowning. Arch Dis Child. 1993;68(5):684-5. 97 Josty IC, Narayanan V, Dickson WA. Burns in patients with epilepsy: changes  in  epidemiology  and  implications  for  burn  treatment  and prevention. Epilepsia. 2000;41(4):453-6. 98 Spitz MC, Towbin JA, Shantz D, Adler LE. Risk factors for burns as a consequence  of  seizures  in  persons  with  epilepsy.  Epilepsia. 1994;35(4):764-7.99 Sherrard  J,  Tonge  BJ,  Ozanne-Smith  J.  Injury  risk  in  young  people with intellectual disability. J Intellect Disabil Res 2002;46(1):6-16. 100 Hauser  WA,  Annegers  JF,  Elveback  LR.  Mortality  in  patients  with epilepsy. Epilepsia. 1980;21(4):399-412.101 Nashef  L.  Sudden  unexpected  death  in  epilepsy:  terminology  and definitions. Epilepsia. 1997: 38; S6-S8.?102 Cockerell  OC,  Johnson  AL,  Sander  JW,  Hart  YM,  Goodridge  DM, Shorvon  SD.  Mortality  from  epilepsy:  results  from  a  prospective population-based study. Lancet. 1994;344(8927):918-21. 103 Lhatoo SD, Johnson AL, Goodridge DM, MacDonald BK, Sander J, Shorvon  SD.  Mortality  in  epilepsy  in  the  first  11  to  14  years  after diagnosis:  Multivariate  analysis  of  a  long-term,  prospective, population-based cohort. Ann Neurol 2001;49(3):336-44. 104 Camfield C, Camfield P, Veuglers P.  Death in children with epilepsy: a population based study.  Lancet 2002;359:1891-95. 105 Kurtz Z, Tookey P, Ross E. Epilepsy in young people: 23 year follow up  of  the  British  national  child  development  study.  BMJ.  BMJ 1998;316(7128):339-42. 106 Walczak TS, Leppik IE, D’Amelio M, Rarick J, So E, Ahman P, et al. Incidence and risk factors in sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: a prospective cohort study. Neurology. 2001;56(4):519-25. 107 Nilsson L, Farahmand BY, Persson PG, Thiblin I, Tomson T. Risk factors for sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: A case-control study. Lancet 1999;353(9156):888-93.108 Appleton  RE.  Mortality  in  paediatric  epilepsy:  Arch  Dis  Child 2003;88:190-194. 109 Connock M, Frew E, Jones B, Bryan S, Cummins C, Fry-Smith A, et al. The clinical effectiveness and cost effectiveness of newer drugs for children with epilepsy. A systematic review. Birmingham: University of  Birmingham.West  Midlands  Health  Technology  Assessment Collaboration; 2003.110 Royal  College  of  Paediatrics  and  Child  Health.  Safer  and  Better Medicines for Children. Developing the Clinical and Research Base of Paediatric Pharmacology in the United Kingdom. London: Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health;2004. 111 Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health. Neonatal and Paediatric Pharmacists Group. Medicines for Children. 2nd ed. London: Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health;2003. 112 Besag FM. Is generic prescribing acceptable in epilepsy? Drug Safety 2000;23(3):173-82. 113 Richens A. Impact of generic substitution of anticonvulsants on the treatment of epilepsy. CNS drugs 1997;8(2):124-133. 114 Rantala H, Tarkka R, Uhari M. A meta-analytic review of the preventive treatment  of  recurrences  of  febrile  seizures.  J  Pediatr. 1997;131(6):922-5. 115 Farwell JR, Lee YJ, Hirtz DG, Sulzbacher SI, Ellenberg JH, Nelson KB. Phenobarbital for febrile seizures: effects on intelligence and on seizure recurrence. N Engl J Med 1990; 322: 364-369.116 Sulzbacher S, Farwell JR, Temkin N, Lu AS, Hirtz DG. Late cognitive ?effects of early treatment with phenobarbital. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 1999; ?38: 387-394. 117 Knudsen  FU,  Paerregaard  A,  Andersen  R,  Andresen  J.  Long  term ?outcome  of  prophylaxis  for  febrile  convulsions.  Arch  Dis  Child. ?1996;74(1):13-8. 118 Schierhout G, Roberts I. Anti-epileptic drugs for preventing seizures ?following  acute  traumatic  brain  injury  (Cochrane  Review).  In:  The ?Cochrane Library, Issue 3, Oxford: Update Software. 119 Shinnar S, Berg AT, Moshe SL, Petix M, Maytal J, Kang H, et al. Risk of  seizure  recurrence  following  a  first  unprovoked  seizure  in ?childhood: a prospective study. Pediatrics. 1990;85(6):1076-85. 120 van Donselaar CA, Brouwer OF, Geerts AT, Arts WF, Stroink H, Peters AC. Clinical course of untreated tonic-clonic seizures in childhood: ?prospective, hospital based study. BMJ 1997;314: 401-404. 121 Camfield  C,  Camfield  P,  Gordon  K,  Dooley  J.  Does  the  number  of seizures  before  treatment  influence  ease  of  control  or  remission  of childhood epilepsy? Not if the number is 10 or less. Neurology 1996; ?46: 41-44. 122 First Seizure Trial Group. Randomized clinical trial on the efficacy of ?antiepileptic  drugs  in  reducing  the  risk  of  relapse  after  a  first ?unprovoked tonic-clonic seizure. Neurology 1993; 43: 478-83. 123 Callaghan  N,  Kenny  RA,  O’Neill  B,  Crowley  M,  Goggin  T.  A prospective  study  between  carbamazepine,  phenytoin  and  sodium valproate  as  monotherapy  in  previously  untreated  and  recently diagnosed  patients  with  epilepsy.  J  Neurol  Neurosurg  Psychiatr ?1985;48(7):639-44. 124 Verity CM, Hosking G, Easter DJ. A multicentre comparative trial of ?sodium valproate and carbamazepine in paediatric epilepsy. Dev Med ?Child Neurol 1995;37(2):97-108. 125 Pal DK, Das T, Chaudhury G, Johnson AL, Neville BGR. Randomised ?controlled trial to assess acceptability of phenobarbital for childhood ?epilepsy in rural India. Lancet 1998;351(9095):19-23. 126 Thilothammal N, Banu K, Ratnam RS. Comparison of phenobarbitone, phenytoin with sodium valproate: Randomized, double-blind study. ?Indian Pediatr 1996;33(7):549-55. 127 Clobazam has equivalent efficacy to carbamazepine and phenytoin ?as monotherapy for childhood epilepsy. Canadian Study Group for ?Childhood Epilepsy. Epilepsia. 1998;39(9):952-9. 128 Privitera MD, Brodie MJ, Mattson RH, Chadwick DW, Neto W, Wang S. EPMN 105 Study Group. Topiramate, carbamazepine and valproate monotherapy: double-blind comparison in newly diagnosed epilepsy. ?Acta Neurol Scand. 2003;107(3):165-75. 129 Genton P. When antiepileptic drugs aggravate epilepsy. Brain Dev. ?2000;22(2):75-80. 130 Parker  AP,  Agathonikou  A,  Robinson  RO,  Panayiotopoulos  CP. ?Inappropriate use of carbamazepine and vigabatrin in typical absence ?seizures. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1998;40(8):517-9. 131 Perucca  E,  Gram  L,  Avanzini  G,  Dulac  O.  Antiepileptic  drugs  as  a ?cause of worsening seizures. Epilepsia. 1998;39(1):5-17. 132 Guerrini R, Dravet C, Genton P, Belmonte A, Kaminska A, Dulac O. Lamotrigine and seizure aggravation in severe myoclonic epilepsy. ?Epilepsia. 1998;39(5):508-12. 133 Lortie A, Chiron C, Dumas C, Mumford JP, Dulac O. Optimizing the ?indication of vigabatrin in children with refractory epilepsy. J Child ?Neurol. 1997;12(4):253-9. 134 Panayiotopoulos  CP.  Typical  absence  seizures  and  their  treatment. ?Arch Dis Child 1999;81:351-5 135 135  Bittencourt  PRM,  Richens  A,    Anti-convulsant  induced  status ?epilepticus  in  Lennox  Gastaut  syndrome  .  Epilepsia ?1981; 22:129-134. 136 Carrazana  EJ,  Wheeler  SD,  Exacerbation  of  juvenile  myoclonic ?epilepsy with lamotrigine. Neurology 2001;56:1424-1425. 137 Biraben A, Allain H, Scarabin JM, Schck S, Edan G. Exacerbation of juneville  myoclonic  epilepsy  with  lamotrigine  Neurology ?2000;55:1758. 138 Posner EB, Mohamed K, Marson AG. Ethosuximide, sodium valproate ?or  lamotrigine  for  absence  seizures  in  children  and  adolescents (Cochrane  Review).  In:  The  Cochrane  Library,  Issue  2,  2004. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 139 Callaghan N, O’Hare J, O’Driscoll D, O’Neil B, Daly M. Comparative study of ethosuxamide and sodium valproate in the treatment of typical absence  seizures  (petit  mal).  Develop.  Med.  Child  Neurol.  1982; 24:830-836. 140 Sato S, White BG, Penry JK, Dreifuss FE, Sackellares JC, Kupferberg HJ.  Valproic  acid  versus  ethosuximide  in  the  treatment  of  absence seizures. Neurology. 1982;32(2):157-63. 141 Frank LM, Enlow T, Holmes GL, Manasco P, Concannon S, Chen C, et al. Lamictal (lamotrigine) monotherapy for typical absence seizures in children. Epilepsia. 1999;40:973-9. 142 Jeavons PM, Clark JE. Sodium valproate in treatment of epilepsy. BMJ. 1974;2(919):584-6. 143 Bourgeois B, Beaumanoir A, Blajev B, de la Cruz N, Despland PA, Egli  M,  et  al.  Monotherapy  with  valproate  in  primary  generalized epilepsies. Epilepsia. 1987;28 (Suppl 2):S8-11. 144 Barron TF, Hunt SL, Hoban TF, Price ML. Lamotrigine monotherapy in children. Pediatr Neurol. 2000;23(2):160-3. 145 Nicolson A, Appleton RE, Chadwick DW, Smith DF. The relationship between treatment with valproate, lamotrigine, and topiramate and the  prognosis  of  the  idiopathic  generalised  epilepsies.  J  Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 2004;75(1):75-9. 146 Farrell K, Connolly MB, Munn R, Peng S, MacWilliam LM. Prospective, open-label, add-on study of lamotrigine in 56 children with intractable generalized epilepsy. Pediatr Neurol. 1997;16(3):201-5.?147 Eriksson  AS,  Nergardh  A,  Hoppu  K.  The  efficacy  of  lamotrigine  in children  and  adolescents  with  refractory  generalized  epilepsy:  a randomized,  double-blind,  crossover  study.  Epilepsia 1998;39(5):495-501. 148 Penry JK, Dean JC, Riela AR. Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy: long-term response  to  therapy.  Epilepsia.  1989;30  (Suppl  4):S19-23; discussion S24-7. 149 Ohtsuka Y, Amano R, Mizukawa M, Oka E, Ohtahara S. Treatment of Intractable  epilepsy  with  high  dose  valproate.  Epilepsia. 1992;33(1):158-164.?150 Beydoun  A,  Sachdeo  RC,  Rosenfeld  WE,  Krauss  GL,  Sessler  N, Mesenbrink  P,  et  al.  Oxcarbazepine  monotherapy  for  partial-onset seizures:  a  multicenter,  double-blind,  clinical  trial.  Neurology. 2000;54(12):2245-51. 151 Dean JC, Penry JK. Valproate monotherapy in 30 patients with partial seizures. Epilepsia. 1988;29(2):140-4. 152 Guerreiro MM, Vigonius U, Pohlmann H, De Manreza MLG, Fejerman N,  Antoniuk  SA,  et  al.  A  double-blind  controlled  clinical  trial  of oxcarbazepine  versus  phenytoin  in  children  and  adolescents  with epilepsy. Epilepsy Res 1997;27(3):205-13. 153 Gilliam FG, Veloso F, Bomhof MA, Gazda SK, Biton V, Ter Bruggen JP,  et  al.  A  dose-comparison  trial  of  topiramate  as  monotherapy  in recently diagnosed partial epilepsy. Neurology. 2003;60(2):196-202. 154 Chiron C, Dulac O, Gram L. Vigabatrin withdrawal randomized study in children. Epilepsy Res 1996;25(3):209-15. 155 Nieto-Barrera M, Brozmanova M, Capovilla G, Christe W, Pedersen B, Kane K, O’Neill F. Lamictal vs. Carbamazepine Study Group. A comparison  of  monotherapy  with  lamotrigine  or  carbamazepine  in patients  with  newly  diagnosed  partial  epilepsy.  Epilepsy  Res 2001;46(2):145-55. 156 Elterman RD, Shields WD, Mansfield KA, Nakagawa J, Bebin M, Conry JA,  et  al.  Randomized  trial  of  vigabatrin  in  patients  with  infantile spasms. Neurology 2001;57(8):1416-21. 157 Chiron C, Dumas C, Jambaque I, Mumford J, Dulac O. Randomized trial comparing vigabatrin and hydrocortisone in infantile spasms due to tuberous sclerosis. Epilepsy Res 1997;26:389-95. 158 Jambaque I, Chiron C, Dumas C, Mumford J, Dulac O. Mental and behavioural  outcome  of  infantile  epilepsy  treated  by  vigabatrin  in tuberous sclerosis patients. Epilepsy Res 2000;38(2-3):151-60. 159 Lux AL, Edwards SW, Hancock E, Johnson AL, Kennedy CR, Newton RW,  et  al.  The  United  Kingdom  Infantile  Spasms  Study  comparing vigabatrin  with  prednisolone  or  tetracosactide  at  14  days:  a multicentre,  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet. 2004;364(9447):1773-8. 160 Prats JM, Garaizar C, Rua MJ, Garcia-Nieto ML, Madoz P. Infantile spasms treated with high doses of sodium valproate: initial response and follow-up. Dev Med Child Neurol 1991;33(7):617-25. 161 Dreifuss F, Farwell J, Holmes G, Joseph C, Lockman L, Madsen JA, et al. Infantile spasms. Comparative trial of nitrazepam and corticotropin. Arch Neurol 1986;43(11):1107-10. 162 Glauser TA, Clark PO, Strawsburg R. A pilot study of topiramate in the treatment of infantile spasms. Epilepsia 1998;39(12):1324-8. 163 Kwan P, Brodie MJ. Effectiveness of first antiepileptic drug. Epilepsia 2001;42:1255-60. 164 Smith RA, Martland T, Lowry MF. Children with seizures presenting to accident and emergency. J Accid Emerg Med 1996;13(1):54-8. 165 Keene DL, Whiting S, Humphreys P. Clobazam as an add-on drug in the treatment of refractory epilepsy of childhood. Can J Neurol Sci 1990;17(3):317-9. 166 Biton V, Montouris GD, Ritter F, Riviello JJ, Reife R, Lim P, et al. A randomized,  placebo-controlled  study  of  topiramate  in  primary generalized  tonic-clonic  seizures.  Topiramate  YTC  Study  Group. Neurology 1999;52(7):1330-7. 167 Motte J, Trevathan E, Arvidsson JFV, Barrera MN, Mullens EL, Manasco P. Lamotrigine for generalized seizures associated with the Lennox- Gastaut syndrome. N Engl J Med 1997;337(25):18 168 Sachdeo RC, Glauser TA, Ritter F, Reife R, Lim P, Pledger G, et al. A double-blind,  randomized  trial  of  topiramate  in  Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Neurology 1999;52(9):1882-7.169 Coppola G, Caliendo G, Veggiotti P, Romeo A, Tortorella G, De Marco P, et al. Topiramate as add-on drug in children, adolescents and young adults with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome: An Italian multicentric study. Epilepsy Res 2002;51(1-2):147-53.170 Chamberlain MC. Nitrazepam for refractory infantile spasm and the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. J Child Neurol 1996;11(1):31-4. 171 Chiron C, Marchand MC, Tran A, Rey E, d’Athis P, Vincent J, et al. Stiripentol  in  severe  myoclonic  epilepsy  in  infancy:  a  randomised placebo-controlled  syndrome-dedicated  trial.  Lancet 2000;356(9242):1638-42. 172 Nieto-Barrera M, Candau R, Nieto-Jimenez M, Correa A, del Portal LR.  Topiramate  in  the  treatment  of  severe  myoclonic  epilepsy  in infancy. Seizure. 2000;9(8):590-4. 173 Duchowny M, Pellock JM, Graf WD, Billard C, Gilman J, Casale E, et al. A placebo-controlled trial of lamotrigine add-on therapy for partial seizures in children. Lamictal Pediatric Partial Seizure Study Group. Neurology 1999;53(8):1724-31. 174 Appleton R, Fichtner K, LaMoreaux L, Alexander J, Halsall G, Murray G,  et  al.  Gabapentin  as  add-on  therapy  in  children  with  refractory partial  seizures:  a  12-week,  multicentre,  double-blind,  placebo- controlled  study.  Gabapentin  Paediatric  Study  Group.  Epilepsia 1999;40(8):1147-54. 175 Luna D, Dulac O, Pajot N, Beaumont D. Vigabatrin in the treatment of  childhood  epilepsies:  a  single-blind  placebo-controlled  study. Epilepsia 1989;30(4):430-7. 176 Elterman RD, Glauser TA, Wyllie E, Reife R, Wu SC, Pledger G. A double-blind,  randomized  trial  of  topiramate  as  adjunctive  therapy for  partial-onset  seizures  in  children.  Topiramate  YP  Study  Group. Neurology 1999;52(7):1338-44. 177 Glauser  TA,  Nigro  M,  Sachdeo  R,  Pasteris  LA,  Weinstein  S,  Abou- Khalil  B,  et  al.  Adjunctive  therapy  with  oxcarbazepine  in  children with  partial  seizures.  The  Oxcarbazepine  Pediatric  Study  Group. Neurology 2000;54(12):2237-44. 178 Glauser  TA,  Pellock  JM,  Bebin  EM,  Fountain  NB,  Ritter  FJ,  Jensen CM, et al. Efficacy and safety of levetiracetam in children with partial seizures: an open-label trial. Epilepsia. 2002;43(5):518-24. 179 Katayama F, Miura H, Takanashi S. Long-term effectiveness and side effects of acetazolamide as an adjunct to other anticonvulsants in the treatment of refractory epilepsies. Brain Dev 2002;24(3):150-4. 180 Resor SR, Jr., Resor LD. Chronic acetazolamide monotherapy in the treatment  of  juvenile  myoclonic  epilepsy.  Neurology 1990;40(11):1677-81. 181 Verrotti A, Basciani F, Morresi S, de Martino M, Morgese G, Chiarelli F. Serum leptin changes in epileptic patients who gain weight after therapy with valproic acid. Neurology. 1999;53(1):230-2. 182 Novak GP, Maytal J, Alshansky A, Eviatar L, Sy-Kho R, Siddique Q. Risk  of  excessive  weight  gain  in  epileptic  children  treated  with valproate. J Child Neurol 1999;14(8):490-5. 183 Bawden HN, Camfield CS, Camfield PR, Cunningham C, Darwish H, Dooley JM, et al. The cognitive and behavioural effects of clobazam and standard monotherapy are comparable. Epilepsy Res 1999;33(2- 3):133-43. 184 Aldenkamp  AP,  Alpherts  WC,  Blennow  G,  Elmqvist  D,  Heijbel  J, Nilsson HL et al. Withdrawal of antiepileptic medication in childrenó effects  on  cognitive  function:  The  Multicenter  Holmfrid  Study. Neurology 1993;43(1):41-50. 185 Brunet L, Miranda J, Roset P, Berini L, Farre M, Mendieta C. Prevalence and risk of gingival enlargement in patients treated with anticonvulsant drugs. Eur J Clin Investig 2001;31(9):781-8. 186 Kaneko S, Battino D, Andermann E, Wada K, Kan R, Takeda A, et al. Congenital  malformations  due  to  antiepileptic  drugs.  Epilepsy  Res 1999;33(2-3):145-58. 187 Samren EB, van Duijn CM, Koch S, Hiilesmaa VK, Klepel H, Bardy AH, et al. Maternal use of antiepileptic drugs and the risk of major congenital  malformations:  a  joint  European  prospective  study  of human  teratogenesis  associated  with  maternal  epilepsy. Epilepsia.1997;38(9):981-90. 188 Kaneko S, Battino D, Andermann E, Wada K, Kan R, Takeda A, et al. Congenital  malformations  due  to  antiepileptic  drugs.  Epilepsy  Res 1999;33(2-3):145-58. 189 Adab N, Kini U, Vinten J, Ayres J, Baker G, Clayton-Smith J, et al. The longer  term  outcome  of  children  born  to  mothers  with  epilepsy.  J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 2004;75(11):1575-83. 190 Dean JC, Hailey H, Moore SJ, Lloyd DJ, Turnpenny PD, Little J. Long term  health  and  neurodevelopment  in  children  exposed  to antiepileptic drugs before birth. J Med Genet 2002;39(4):251-9. 191 Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. Committee on  Safety  of  Medicines.  Current  problems  in  pharmacovigilance. 2003;29.  [cited  on  18  march  2004]  Available  from  url:  http:// medicines.mhra.gov.uk/ourwork/monitorsafequalmed/ currentproblems/cpsept2003.pdf 192 Jannuzzi G, Cian P, Fattore C, Gatti G, Bartoli A, Monaco F, et al. A multicenter  randomized  controlled  trial  on  the  clinical  impact  of therapeutic  drug  monitoring  in  patients  with  newly  diagnosed epilepsy. Epilepsia 2000;41(2):222-30. 193 British Medical Association, Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain. British National Formulary 47. London: The Association, The Society;  2004.  [cited  on  22  Apr  2004].  Available  from  url:  http:// www.bnf.org194 Ramaratnam  S,  Baker  GA,  Goldstein  LH.  Psychological  treatments for epilepsy (Cochrane Review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 2, 2004. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.?195 Randomised  study  of  antiepileptic  drug  withdrawal  in  patients  in remission. Medical Research Council Antiepileptic Drug Withdrawal Study Group. Lancet. 1991;337(8751):1175-80. 196 Shinnar S, Vining EP, Mellits ED, D’Souza BJ, Holden K, Baumgardner RA, Freeman JM. Discontinuing antiepileptic medication in children with epilepsy after two years without seizures. A prospective study. N Engl J Med 1985;313(16):976-80. 197 Chadwick D, Taylor J, Johnson T. Outcomes after seizure recurrence in people with well-controlled epilepsy and the factors that influence it.  The  MRC  Antiepileptic  Drug  Withdrawal  Group.  Epilepsia 1996;37(11):1043-50. 198 Berg AT, Shinnar S. Relapse following discontinuation of antiepileptic drugs: a meta-analysis. Neurology 1994;44(4):601-8. 199 Peters AC, Brouwer OF, Geerts AT, Arts WF, Stroink H, van Donselaar CA.  Randomized  prospective  study  of  early  discontinuation  of antiepileptic  drugs  in  children  with  epilepsy.  Neurology 1998;50(3):724-30.200 Andersson  T,  Braathen  G,  Persson  A,  Theorell  K.  A  comparison between one and three years of treatment in uncomplicated childhood epilepsy:  a  prospective  study.  II.  The  EEG  as  predictor  of  outcome after withdrawal of treatment. Epilepsia. 1997; 38(2):225-32. 201 Sirven JI, Sperling M, Wingerchuk DM. Early versus late antiepileptic drug  withdrawal  for  people  with  epilepsy  in  remission  (Cochrane Review).  In:  The  Cochrane  Library,  Issue  2,  2004.  Chichester,  UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 202 Delgado-Escueta AV, Enrile-Bacsal F. Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy of Janz. Neurology. 1984;34(3):285-94.203 Tennison  M,  Greenwood  R,  Lewis  D,  Thorn  M.  Discontinuing antiepileptic drugs in children with epilepsy - A comparison of a six- week  and  a  nine-month  taper  period.  N  Engl  J  Med 1994;330(20):1407-10.204 Paediatric  Information  and  Education  Resource.  Children  with epilepsy: a guideline. [cited 24 June 2004] Available from URL: http:/ /www.pier.shef.ac.uk/ 205 Vining EP, Freeman JM, Ballaban-Gil K, Camfield CS, Camfield PR, Holmes  GL  et  al.  A  multi-center  study  of  efficacy  of  the  ketogenic diet. Arch Neurol 1998;55:1433-1437. 206 Freeman JM, Vining EP, Pillas DJ, Pyzik PL, Casey JC, Kelly LM.The efficacy  of  the  ketogenic  diet-1998  a  prospective  evaluation  of intervention in 150 children. Pediatrics 1998;102:1358-1363. 207 Hemingway C, Freeman JM, Pillas DJ Pyzik. The ketogenic diet: a 3- 6  yr  follow  up  of  150  children  enrolled  prospectively.  Pediatrics 2001:108:898-905. 208 Shorvon SD. Status epilepticus: its clinical features and treatment in children and adults. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994. 209 Alldredge BK, Gelb AM, Isaacs SM, Corry MD, Allen F, Ulrich S, et al.  A  comparison  of  lorazepam,  diazepam,  and  placebo  for  the treatment  of  out-of-hospital  status  epilepticus.  N  Engl  J  Med. 2001;345(9):631-7.210 Cereghino  JJ,  Mitchell  WG,  Murphy  J,  Kriel  RL,  Rosenfeld  WE, Trevathan  E.  Treating  repetitive  seizures  with  a  rectal  diazepam formulation: a randomized study. The North American Diastat Study Group. Neurology 1998;51(5):1274-82. 211 Milligan NM, Dhillon S, Griffiths A, Oxley J, Richens A. A clinical trial of single dose rectal and oral administration of diazepam for the prevention  of  serial  seizures  in  adult  epileptic  patients.  J  Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 1984;47(3):235-40.212 Scott  RC,  Besag  FM,  Neville  BG.  Buccal  midazolam  and  rectal diazepam  for  treatment  of  prolonged  seizures  in  childhood  and adolescence: a randomised trial. Lancet 1999;353(9153):623-6. 213 Wilson MT, Macleod S, O’Regan ME. Nasal/buccal midazolam use in the community. Arch Dis Child 2004;89(1):50-1. 214 Jeannet PY, Roulet E, Maeder-Ingvar M, Gehri M, Jutzi A, Deonna T. Home and hospital treatment of acute seizures in children with nasal midazolam. Eur J Paediatr Neurol 1999;3(2):73-7. 215 Garr RE, Appleton RE, Robson WJ, Molyneux EM. Children presenting with convulsions (including status epilepticus) to a paediatric accident and  emergency  department:  an  audit  of  a  treatment  protocol.  Dev Med Child Neurol 1999;41(1):44-7. 216 Appleton R, Martland T, Phillips B. Drug management for acute tonic-clonic convulsions including convulsive status epilepticus in children (Cochrane Review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 4, 2002. Oxford: Update Software.217 Chamberlain JM, Altieri MA, Futterman C, Young GM, Ochsenschlager DW, Waisman Y. A prospective, randomized study comparing intramuscular midazolam with intravenous diazepam for the treatment of seizures in children. ?Pediatr Emerg Care 1997;13(2):92-4. 218 Appleton R, Choonara I, Martland T, Phillips B, Scott R, Whitehouse W. The ?treatment of convulsive status epilepticus in children. The Status Epilepticus Working Party, Members of the Status Epilepticus Working Party. Arch Dis Child 2000 Nov;83(5):415-9. 219 Walker MC, Smith SJ, Shorvon SD. The intensive care treatment of convulsive status epilepticus in the UK. Results of a national survey and recommendations. Anaesthesia 1995;50(2):130-5. 220 De  Negri  M,  Baglietto  MG,  Battaglia  FM,  Gaggero  R,  Pessagno  A, Recanati L.  Treatment of electrical status epilepticus by short diazepam (DZP)  cycles  after  DZP  rectal  bolus  test.  Brain  Dev 1995;17(5):330-3. 221 Corman  C,  Guberman  A,  Benavente  O.  Clobazam  in  partial  status epilepticus. Seizure. 1998;7(3):243-7. 222 O’Regan  ME,  Brown  JK,  Clarke  M.  Nasal  rather  than  rectal benzodiazepines  in  the  management  of  acute  childhood  seizures? Dev Med Child Neuro. 1996;38(11):1037-45. 223 O’Regan  ME,  Brown  JK.  Is  ACTH  a  key  to  understanding anticonvulsant action? Dev Med Child Neurol 1998;40(2):82-9. 224 Livingston  JH,  Brown  JK.  Diagnosis  and  management  of  non- convulsive  status  epilepticus.  Pediatric  Rev  Commun. 1988; 2(4):283-315. 225 Tassinari CA, Rubboli G, Volpi L, Meletti S, d’Orsi G, Franca M, et al. Encephalopathy with electrical status epilepticus during slow sleep or ESES syndrome including the acquired aphasia. Clin Neurophysiol 2000;111( Suppl 2):S94-S102. 226 Treiman  DM.  Status  epilepticus.  Baillieres  Clin  Neurol. 1996;5(4):821-39. 227 Cornaggia CM, Gobbi G. Learning disability in epilepsy: definitions and classification. Epilepsia. 2001;42 (Suppl 1):2-5. 228 Deonna  T,  Zesiger  P,  Davidoff  V,  Maeder  M,  Mayor  C,  Roulet  E. Benign  partial  epilepsy  of  childhood:  a  longitudinal neuropsychological and EEG study of cognitive function. Dev Med Child Neurol 2000;42(9):595-603. 229 Baglietto MG, Battaglia FM, Nobili L, Tortorelli S, De Negri E, Calevo MG, et al. Neuropsychological disorders related to interictal epileptic discharges  during  sleep  in  benign  epilepsy  of  childhood  with centrotemporal  or  Rolandic  spikes.  Dev  Med  Child Neurol2001;43(6):407-12. 230 Hommet C, Billard C, Motte J, Passage GD, Perrier D, Gillet P, et al. Cognitive  function  in  adolescents  and  young  adults  in  complete remission  from  benign  childhood  epilepsy  with  centro-temporal spikes. Epileptic Disorders. 2001;3(4):207-16. 231 Nolan MA, Redoblado MA, Lah S, Sabaz M, Lawson JA, Cunningham AM,  et  al.  Intelligence  in  childhood  epilepsy  syndromes.  Epilepsy Res 2003;53(1-2):139-50. 232 Robinson  RO,  Baird  G,  Robinson  G,  Simonoff  E.  Landau-Kleffner syndrome: course and correlates with outcome. Dev Med Child Neurol 2001;43(4):243-7. 233 Davies  S,  Heyman  I,  Goodman  R.  A  population  survey  of  mental health  problems  in  children  with  epilepsy.  Dev  Med  Child  Neurol 2003;45(5):292-5. 234 Hoare P, Kerley S. Psychosocial adjustment of children with chronic epilepsy  and  their  families.  Dev  Med  Child  Neurol 1991; 33(3):201-15. 235 Hoare P, Mann H. Self-esteem and behavioural adjustment in children with  epilepsy  and  children  with  diabetes.  Journal  of  Psychosomat Res 1994;38(8):859-69. 236 Austin JK, Risinger MW, Beckett LA. Correlates of behavior problems in children with epilepsy. Epilepsia 1992;33(6):1115-22. 237 Austin JK, Dunn DW. Progressive behavioral changes in children with epilepsy. Progress in Brain Research 2002;135(pp 419-427). 238 Austin JK, Dunn DW, Caffrey HM, Perkins SM, Harezlak J, Rose DF. ?Recurrent  seizures  and  behavior  problems  in  children  with  first recognized  seizures:  a  prospective  study.  Epilepsia. 2002;43(12):1564-73. 239 Ettinger AB, Weisbrot DM, Nolan EE, Gadow KD, Vitale SA, Andriola MR, et al. Symptoms of depression and anxiety in pediatric epilepsy patients. Epilepsia 1998;39(6):595-9. 240 Dunn DW, Austin JK, Harezlak J, Ambrosius WT. ADHD and epilepsy in childhood. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2003;45(1):50-4. 241 de Silva M, MacArdle B, McGowan M, Hughes E, Stewart J, Neville BG  et  al.  Randomised  comparative  monotherapy  trial  of phenobarbitone, phenytoin, carbamazepine or sodium valproate for newly diagnosed childhood epilepsy. Lancet 1996;347:709-713. 242 Pal DK, Das T, Chaudhury G, Johnson AL, Neville BG. Randomised controlled trial to assess acceptability of phenobarbital for childhood epilepsy in rural India. Lancet 1998;351:19-23. 243 Aldenkamp AP. Effects of antiepileptic drugs on cognition. Epilepsia 2001;42 (Suppl 1):46-9. 244 Besag FM. Behavioural effects of the new anticonvulsants. Drug Safety 2001;24(7):513-536. 245 Sillanpaa M. Epilepsy in people with intellectual disability. In: Wallace S,  Farrell  K,  eds.    Epilepsy  in  Children.    2nd  ed.  London:  Arnold, 2004. 246 Uvebrant P. Hemiplegic cerebral palsy. Aetiology and outcome. Acta Paediatr Scand Suppl 1988;77(345):1-100. 247 Cioni G, Sales B, Paolicelli PB, Petacchi E, Scusa MF, Canapicchi R. MRI and clinical characteristics of children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy. Neuropediatrics. 1999;30(5):249-55.248 Tuchman  R,  Rapin  I.  Epilepsy  in  autism.  Lancet  Neurol. 2002;1(6):352-8.?249 Steffenburg  S,  Gillberg  C,  Steffenburg  U.  Psychiatric  disorders  in children and adolescents with mental retardation and active epilepsy. Arch Neurol. 1996;53(9):904-12. D250 unn DW, Austin JK, Caffrey HM, Perkins SM. A prospective study of teachers’ ratings of behavior problems in children with new-onset seizures. Epilepsy Behav. 2003;4(1):26-35. 251 Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN). Attention Deficit and Hyperkinetic Disorders in Children and Young People. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2001. (SIGN publication no. 52).252 National  Institute  for  Clinical  Excellence  (NICE).  Guidance  on  the Use  of  Methylphenidate  (Ritalin,  Equasym)  for  Attention  Deficit/ Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in childhood. London: NICE; 2000. 253 Hemmer SA, Pasternak JF, Zecker SG, Trommer BL. Stimulant therapy and  seizure  risk  in  children  with  ADHD.  Pediatr  Neurol 2001;24(2):99-102. 254 Gucuyener K, Erdemoglu AK, Senol S, Serdaroglu A, Soysal S, Kockar AI. Use of methylphenidate for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in patients with epilepsy or electroencephalographic abnormalities. J Child Neurol 2003;18(2):109-12.255 Feldman  H,  Crumrine  P,  Handen  BL,  Alvin  R,  Teodori  J. Methylphenidate  in  children  with  seizures  and  attention-deficit disorder. Am J Dis Child 1989;143(9):1081-6. 256 Gross-Tsur V, Manor O, van der Meere J, Joseph A, Shalev RS. Epilepsy and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: is methylphenidate safe and effective? J Pediatr 1997;130(4):670-4. 257 Cortesi G., Giannoti F., and Ottaviano S., 1999. Sleep problems and daytime  behaviour  in  childhood  idiopathic  epilepsy.  Epilepsia  40. 1557-65. 258 Stores G., Wiggs l., and Campling G. 1998. Sleep disorders and their relation to psychological disturbance in children with epilepsy. Child Care Health Dev 1998;24:5-19.259 Stores  G.  Medication  for  sleep-wake  disorders.  Arch  Dis  Child 2003;88(10):899-903. 260 Jan JE, Connolly MB, Hamilton D, Freeman RD, Laudon M. Melatonin treatment  of  non-epileptic  myoclonus  in  children.  Dev  Med  Child Neurol 1999;41(4):255-9. 261 Jan JE, Freeman RD, Fast DK. Melatonin treatment of sleep-wake cycle disorders  in  children  and  adolescents.  Dev  Med  Child  Neurol 1999;41(7):491-500.262 Gupta  M,  Aneja  S,  Kohli  K.  Add-on  melatonin  improves  quality  of life in epileptic children on valproate monotherapy: a randomized, double-blind,  placebo-controlled  trial.  Epilepsy  Behav. 2004;5(3):316-21.263 Besag  FM.  When  is  it  inappropriate  to  prescribe  psychotropic medication? Epilepsia 2002;43 Suppl 2:45-50.?264 Medicines  and  Healthcare  products  Regulatory  Agency.  Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors - use in children and adolescents with major depressive disorder. London: Public Health Link:2003. [cited on 25 June 2004] Available from URL: http://medicines.mhra.gov.uk/ ourwork/monitorsafequalmed/safetymessages/cemssri_101203.pdf 265 Schur SB, Sikich L, Findling RL, Malone RP, Crismon ML, Derivan A, et  al.  Treatment  recommendations  for  the  use  of  antipsychotics  for aggressive youth (TRAAY). Part I: a review. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatr 2003;42(2):132-44. 266 McCracken JT, McGough J, Shah B, Cronin P, Hong D, Aman MG, et al. Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology  Risperidone in children with autism and serious behavioral problems. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(5):314-21. 267 Schmitz B Antidepressant drugs: indications and guidelines for use in epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2002;43 Suppl 2:14-8. 268 Koch-Stoecker S. Antipsychotic drugs and epilepsy: indications and treatment guidelines. Epilepsia. 2002;43 Suppl 2:19-24. 269 Bradley P, Lindsay B. Epilepsy clinics versus general neurology or medical clinics (Cochrane Review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 4, 2002. Oxford: Update Software.270 Bradley P, Lindsay B. Specialist epilepsy nurses for treating epilepsy (Cochrane Review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 2001. Oxford: Update Software. 271 Bloomfield S, Farquhar JW. Is a specialist paediatric diabetic clinic better? Arch ?Dis Child 1990;65(1):139-40. 272 Smith  PE,  Myson  V,  Gibbon  F.  A  teenager  epilepsy  clinic: ?observational study. Eur J Neurol 2002;9(4):373-6. 273 Services for patients with epilepsy. Report of a CSAG advisory group chaired  by  Professor  Alison  Kitson.  London:Department  of ?Health;1999. 274 Crawford  P,  Nicholson  C.  Epilepsy  management.  Prof  Nurse ?1999;14:565-9. 275 Mills N, Bachmann MO, Harvey I, Hine I, McGowan M. Effect of a ?primary-care-based epilepsy specialist nurse service on quality of care from the patients’ perspective: quasi-experimental evaluation. Seizure 1999;8:1-7. 276 Sarkissian S, Wennberg R. Effects of the acute care practitioner role on  epilepsy  monitoring  outcomes.  Outcomes  Manag  Nurs  Pract 1999;3:161-6. 277 Hosking PG. The specialist nurse role in the treatment of refractory epilepsy. Seizure 2004;13(5):303-7. 278 MacDonald D, Torrance N, Wood S, Womersley J. General-practice- based nurse specialists-taking a lead in improving the care of people with epilepsy. Seizure 2000;9(1):31-5. 279 National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Newer Drugs for Epilepsy in Children. London: The Institute. (NICE Health Technology Appraisal Guidance  TA079).  [cited  9  March  2005]  Available  from  url:  http:// www.nice.org.uk/pdf/ta079fullguidance.pdf 
BEHAVIOUR AND LEARNINGAlthough many children with epilepsy have intellectual functioning in the normal range, learning and behavioural problems are more prevalent in this group than in the general childhood population.All children with epilepsy should have their behavioural and academic progress reviewed on a regular basis by the epilepsy team. Children with academic or behavioural difficulties should have appropriate educational and/or psychological assessment and intervention.EPILEPSY AND THE USE OF OTHER MEDICATIONSNeurostimulant treatment should not be withheld, when indicated, from children with epilepsy and ADHD.Epilepsy, or a history of seizures, are not contraindications to the use of melatonin for the treatment of sleep disorders in children and young people.Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and atypical neuroleptics such as risperidone should not be withheld, when indicated, in children and young people with epilepsy and associated behavioural and psychiatric disorders.CALCULATION OF CORRECTED QT INTERVALBazett’s formula:Normal value: 		<0.44 secondsIndeterminate: 	0.44 – 0.49 secondsAbnormal: 		>0.49 secondsORIf ECG paper speed is at 25 mm/second use the nomogram below:This nomogram indicates when the QTc is in one of three ranges. If the QTc is above the lower line (QTc >/= 0.44) a 12-lead ECG is suggested.MODELS OF CARE* Children with epilepsy should have access to specialist epilepsy services, including dedicated young people and transition clinics* Each child should have an individual management plan agreed with the family and primary care team* Annual review is suggested as a minimum, even for children with well controlled epilepsy, to identify potential problems, ensure discussion on issues such as withdrawal of treatment, and minimise the possibility of becoming lost to follow up.* Each epilepsy team should include paediatric epilepsy nurse specialists.* Children and families should be advised of the range of services provided by the voluntary sector.
USEFUL CONTACT DETAILSEnlighten – Action for Epilepsy5 Coates Place?Edinburgh, EH3 7AA?Tel: 0131 226 5458 • Fax: 0131 220 2855 Email: info@enlighten.org.uk?Website: www.enlighten.org.ukEpilepsy ActionNew Anstey House, Gate Way Drive?Yeadon, Leeds LS19 7XY?Helpline: 0808 800 5555 • Fax: 0808 800 5555 Email: helpline@epilepsy.org.uk?Website: www.epilepy.org.ukEpilepsy Connections100 Wellington Street?Glasgow, G2 6DH?Tel: 0141 248 4125 • Fax: 0141 248 5887 Website: www.epilepsyconnections.org.ukEpilepsy Scotland48 Govan Road, Glasgow G51 1JL?Helpline: 0808 800 2200 • Fax: 0141 419 1709 Email: enquiries@epilepsyscotland.org.uk Website: www.epilepsyscotland.org.uk
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF EPILEPSIES IN CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLEDIAGNOSISDIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSISThere is wide differential diagnosis of paroxysmal episodes in childhood. Misdiagnosis of epilepsy appears to be a significant problem and may have major longer term implications. A service for children with epilepsy should have specialists with skills and interest in the management of epilepsy and other paroxysmal disorders.The diagnosis of epilepsy should be made by a paediatric neurologist or paediatrician with expertise in childhood epilepsy.An EEG should only be requested after careful clinical evaluation by someone with expertise in childhood epilepsy.INVESTIGATIVE PROCEDURES             ECG AND EEGAll children presenting with convulsive seizures should have an ECG with a calculation of the QTc interval.Home video camera recordings should be used in order to capture recurrent events where the diagnosis is in doubt.All children with recurrent epileptic seizures should have an EEG. An early recording may avoid the need for repeated EEG investigations.For children with recurrent epileptic seizures and a normal standard EEG, a second EEG recording including sleep should be used to aid identification of a specific epilepsy syndrome.Where the clinical diagnosis of epilepsy is uncertain and if events are sufficiently frequent, an ictal EEG should be used to make a diagnosis of an epileptic or non-epileptic seizure.* An EEG is not indicated for children with recurrent or complex febrile seizures.* Antiepileptic drug medication should not usually be started before an EEG recording since it may mask a syndromic diagnosis.BRAIN IMAGINGMost children with epilepsy should have an elective MRI brain scan. Children with the following epilepsy syndromes (which are following a typical course) do not need brain imaging:* idiopathic (primary) generalised epilepsies (eg childhood absence epilepsy, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy or juvenile absence epilepsy)* benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (benign rolandic epilepsy).
MANAGEMENT             INFORMATION AND PLANNINGChildren with epilepsy should be encouraged to participate in normal activities with their peers. Supervision requirements should be individualised taking into account the type of activity and the seizure history.A checklist should be used to help healthcare professionals deliver appropriate information to children, families and carers.Families should be advised if the child has an increased risk of SUDEP. They can be reassured if the risk is considered to be low.INFORMATION FOR SCHOOLSChildren should be enabled to participate in the full range of school activities.Children who have epilepsy should have a written care plan for their epilepsy, drawn up in agreement with the school and family.Epilepsy awareness training and written information should be offered to schools.ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG TREATMENT?WHEN TO START ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG TREATMENTChildren with febrile seizures, even if recurrent, should not be treated prophylactically with antiepileptic drugs.Long term prophylactic antiepileptic drug treatment for children with head injuries is not indicated.Antiepileptic drug treatment should not be commenced routinely after a first, unprovoked tonic-clonic seizure.Antiepileptic drugs which may WORSEN specific syndromes or seizuresAntiepileptic drugEpileptic syndrome/seizure typecarbamazepine, vigabatrin, tiagabine, phenytoinchildhood absence epilepsy, juvenile absence epilepsy, juvenile myoclonic epilepsyvigabatrin absences and absence statusclonazepamgeneralised tonic status in Lennox-Gastaut SyndromelamotrigineDravet’s syndrome?juvenile myoclonic epilepsyANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG TREATMENT (Contd.)WHICH DRUG TO GIVE?The choice of first AED should be determined where possible by syndromic diagnosis and potential adverse effects.When appropriate monotherapy fails to reduce seizure frequency, combination therapy should be considered.The choice of combination therapy should be guided by the epilepsy syndrome and the adverse effect profile of the AED.Where there is no response to an appropriate AED, the diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy should be reviewed.Referral to tertiary specialist care should be considered if a child fails to respond to two AEDs appropriate to the epilepsy in adequate dosages over a period of six months.MANAGEMENT OF PROLONGED OR SERIAL SEIZURES AND CONVULSIVE STATUS EPILEPTICUSProlonged or serial seizures should be treated with either nasal or buccal midazolam or rectal diazepam.All units admitting children should have a protocol for the management of convulsive status epilepticus.ADVERSE EFFECTSClear advice on the management of the potential adverse effects of AEDs should be discussed with children and parents or carers.Routine AED level monitoring is not indicated in children.Adolescent girls taking AEDs and their parents should be advised of the risks of fetal malformations and developmental delay.WITHDRAWAL OF ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGSWithdrawal of AED treatment should be considered in children who have been seizure free for two or more years.The prescription of any medication requires an assessment of risk and of benefit. In this guideline the efficacy and safety of AEDs have been reviewed using the best available evidence. Where recommendations are graded for individual AEDs, this is done irrespective of the licensing status of that medication.[1]4[2]3,4[3]4[4]2+