Revised terminology and concepts for organization of seizures and epilepsies: Report of the ILAE Commission on Classification and Terminology, 2005–2009Anne T. BergDepartment of Biology, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois, U.S.ADepartment of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, Northwestern Children’s Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.Samuel F. BerkovicEpilepsy Research Centre, University of Melbourne (Austin Health), West Heidelberg, Victoria, AustraliaMartin J. BrodieEpilepsy Unit, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, ScotlandJeffrey BuchhalterDepartment of Neurology, Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona, U.S.A.J. Helen CrossNeurosciences Unit, UCL-Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United KingdomNational Centre for Young People with Epilepsy, Lingfield, United KingdomWalter van Emde BoasDepartment of EEG/EMU, Epilepsy Clinic ‘‘Meer & Bosch,’’ Heemstede; Stichting Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland, Hoofddorp, The NetherlandsJerome EngelDepartment of Neurology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, U.S.A.Jacqueline FrenchDepartment of Neurology, New York University, New York, New York, U.S.A.Tracy A. GlauserDepartment of Neurology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.Gary W. MathernDepartment of Neurosurgery, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, U.S.A.; Solomon L. MosheDepartment of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, U.S.A.Douglas NordliDepartment of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, Northwestern Children’s Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.Perrine PlouinDepartment of Neurology, Hospital Necker Enfant Malades, Paris, France Ingrid E. SchefferEpilepsy Research Centre, University of Melbourne (Austin Health), West Heidelberg, Victoria, AustraliaAccepted December 22, 2009; Early View publication February 26, 2010.Address correspondence to Anne T. Berg, Department of Biology, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL 60115, U.S.A. E-mail: atberg@niu.eduWiley Periodicals, Inc.?a 2010 International League Against EpilepsySUMMARYThe International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) Commission on Classification and Terminology has revised concepts, terminology, and approaches for classifying seizures and forms of epilepsy. Generalized and focal are redefined for seizures as occurring in and rapidly engaging bilaterally distributed networks (generalized) and within networks limited to one hemisphere and either discretely localized or more widely distributed (focal). Classification of generalized seizures is simplified. No natural classification for focal seizures exists; focal seizures should be described according to their manifestations (e.g., dyscognitive, focal motor). The concepts of generalized and focal do not apply to electroclinical syndromes. Genetic, structural–metabolic, and unknown represent modified concepts to replace idiopathic, symptomatic, and cryptogenic. Not all epilepsies are recognized as electroclinical syndromes. Organization of forms of epilepsy is first by specificity: electroclinical syndromes, nonsyndromic epilepsies with structural–metabolic causes, and epilepsies of unknown cause. Further organization within these divisions can be accomplished in a flexible manner depending on purpose. Natural classes (e.g., specific underlying cause, age at onset, associated seizure type), or pragmatic groupings (e.g., epileptic encephalopathies, self-limited electroclinical syndromes) may serve as the basis for organizing knowledge about recognized forms of epilepsy and facilitate identification of new forms.KEY WORDS: Epilepsy, Classification, Syndrome, Seizure, Organization.       The history of classification has rested largely upon astute observations and expert opinions. First published in 1960 and last updated officially in 1981 for seizures (Commission on Classification and Terminology of the International League Against Epilepsy [ILAE], 1981) and 1989 for epilepsies (Commission on Classification and Terminology of the International League Against Epilepsy, 1989), the ILAE classifications are based on concepts that, for the most part, predate modern neuroimaging, genomic technologies, and concepts in molecular biology. The original authors foresaw that changes to the classification would be needed as new information was acquired and as new investigative technologies were developed. This is no simple task. Attempts have been made to update the 1989 and 1981 documents (Engel, 2001, 2006); however, no new proposal has been forthcoming.       A primary motivation for revising the classification in the 2005–2009 Commission term and to continue revising it in the future is to bring epilepsy out of the shadows of expert opinion and assertion-dominated arguments so that the classification of the epilepsies fully reflects and profits from all of the other advances being made in basic and clinical neurosciences and so that those advances can be incorporated into clinical practice. In the following report we present the main findings and recommendations of the Commission’s deliberations during the 2005–2009 term accompanied by comments interleaved with the main text. The comments provide background, explanations, and justifications for these decisions and provide some insight into the variety of considerations that were addressed and why specific decisions were made.       Although changes have been made to terminology and concepts, we emphasize that no changes (other than to nomenclature) are being made to the list of epilepsy entities (‘‘syndromes’’) already recognized and updated in the 2006 Task force report (Engel, 2006). Furthermore, the revisions made to terminology and concepts in epilepsy do not have any tangible impact on how clinicians use the electroclinical syndromes that have been internationally recognized and that are applied to people with epilepsy around the world every day.       Terminology and Concepts for Classification of Seizures and EpilepsiesMode of seizure onset and classification of seizures       Generalized epileptic seizures are conceptualized as originating at some point within, and rapidly engaging, bilaterally distributed networks. Such bilateral networks can include cortical and subcortical structures, but do not necessarily include the entire cortex. Although individual seizure onsets can appear localized, the location and lateralization are not consistent from one seizure to another. Generalized seizures can be asymmetric.       Focal epileptic seizures are conceptualized as originating within networks limited to one hemisphere. They may be discretely localized or more widely distributed. Focal seizures may originate in subcortical structures. For each seizure type, ictal onset is consistent from one seizure to another, with preferential propagation patterns that can involve the contralateral hemisphere. In some cases, however, there is more than one network, and more than one seizure type, but each individual seizure type has a consistent site of onset. Focal seizures do not fall into any recognized set of natural classes based on any current understanding of the mechanisms involved.       The following specific changes to the 1981 classification of seizures have been made.1. Neonatal seizures are no longer regarded as a separate entity. Seizures in neonates can be classified within the proposed scheme.2. The previous subclassification of absence seizures has been simplified and altered. Myoclonic absence seizures and eyelid myoclonia are now recognized.3. Spasms were not explicitly acknowledged in the 1981 classification of seizures. They are now included. The term ‘‘epileptic spasms,’’ which includes infantile spasms, was recognized previously (Blume et al., 2001). Because spasms may continue past or even occur de novo after infancy (Camfield et al., 2003, Goldstein & Slomski, 2008), the more general term ‘‘epileptic spasms’’ is used. There was inadequate knowledge to make a firm decision regarding whether spasms should be classified as focal, generalized, or both; consequently, they have been placed in their own group as unknown.4. For focal seizures, the distinction between the different types (e.g., complex partial and simple partial) is eliminated. It is important, however, to recognize that impairment of consciousness/awareness or other dyscognitive features, localization, and progression of ictal events can be of primary importance in the evaluation of individual patients and for specific purposes (e.g., differential diagnosis of nonepileptic events from epileptic seizures, randomized trials, surgery). Nothing in this recommendation precludes describing focal seizures according to these or other features.5. Myoclonic atonic (previously called ‘‘myoclonic astatic’’) seizures are now recognized.6. Table 1 presents the list of recognized seizure types.Table 1. Classification of seizuresa* Generalized seizures?o Tonic–clonic (in any combination) o Absence* Typical?* Atypical?* Absence with special features* Myoclonic absence* Eyelid myoclonia o Myoclonic* Myoclonic * Myoclonic atonic * Myoclonic tonico Clonico Tonic o Atonic* Focal seizures * Unknowno Epileptic spasmsaSeizure that cannot be clearly diagnosed into one of the preceding categories should be considered unclassified until further information allows their accurate diagnosis. This is not considered a classification category, however.Descriptors of focal seizures       For pragmatic reasons and to facilitate continuity with the 1981 classification of seizures, descriptors of focal seizures may be used, individually or in combination with other features depending on the purpose. We have listed examples chosen to facilitate continuity with the 1981 seizure document and which have been drawn from the glossary of ictal semiology (Blume et al., 2001) (Table 2).       The classification of status epilepticus will be the subject of a separate report in the future.Underlying type of cause (etiology)Instead of the terms idiopathic, symptomatic, and cryptogenic, the following three terms and their associated concepts are recommended:1. Genetic: The concept of genetic epilepsy is that the epilepsy is, as best as understood, the direct result of a known or presumed genetic defect(s) in which seizures are the core symptom of the disorder. The knowledge regarding the genetic contributions may derive from specific molecular genetic studies that have been well replicated and even become the basis of diagnostic tests (e.g., SCN1A and Dravet syndrome) or the evidence for a central role of a genetic component may come from appropriately designed family studies. Designation of the fundamental nature of the disorder as genetic does not exclude the possibility that environmental factors (outside the individual) may contribute to the expression of disease. At the present time, there is virtually no knowledge to support specific environmental influences as causes of or contributors to these forms of epilepsy.2. ‘‘Structural/metabolic’’: Conceptually, there is a distinct other structural or metabolic condition or disease that has been demonstrated to be associated with a substantially increased risk of developing epilepsy in appropriately designed studies. Structural lesions of course include acquired disorders such as stroke, trauma, and infection. They may also be of genetic origin (e.g., tuberous sclerosis, many malformations of cortical development); however, as we currently understand it, there is a separate disorder inter- posed between the genetic defect and the epilepsy.3. ‘‘Unknown cause’’: Unknowon is meant to be viewed neutrally and to designate that the nature of the underlying cause is as yet unknown; it may have a fundamental genetic defect at its core or it may be the consequence of a separate as yet unrecognized disorder.Diseases, syndromes, and epilepsiesDisease versus syndrome       Although there is reason to distinguish the concepts of disease and syndrome, these terms are not consistently used in medicine. Ultimately, it was decided not to insist on the disease–syndrome distinction in referring to the epilepsies at this time, although either or both terms have been and will continue to be used depending on the context and custom. Instead, there are at least three or four groupings that may be invoked in this context and as described below:       Electroclinical syndromes: Henceforth, the use of the term ‘‘syndrome’’ will be restricted to a group of clinical entities that are reliably identified by a cluster of electroclinical characteristics. Patients whose epilepsy does not fit the criteria for a specific electroclinical syndrome can be described with respect to a variety of clinically relevant factors (e.g., known etiology and seizure types). This does not, however, provide a precise (syndromic) diagnosis of their epilepsy.       Constellations: In addition to the electroclinical syndromes with strong developmental and genetic components to them, there are a number of entities that are not exactly electroclinical syndromes in the same sense but which represent clinically distinctive constellations on the basis of specific lesions or other causes. These are diagnostically meaningful forms of epilepsy and may have implications for clinical treatment, particularly surgery. These include mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (with hippocampal sclerosis), hypothalamic hamartoma with gelastic seizures, epilepsy with hemiconvulsion and hemiplegia, and Rasmussen ‘‘syndrome.’’ Age at presentation is not a defining feature in these disorders, as we understand them; however, they are sufficiently distinctive to be recognized as relatively specific diagnostic entities. Whether or not they are considered ‘‘electroclinical syndromes’’ now or in the future is less important than that they be recognized by clinicians who are treating patients.       Structural/metabolic epilepsies: The next group includes epilepsies secondary to specific structural or metabolic lesions or conditions but which do not, given our current understanding, fit a specific electroclinical pattern, although that may change in the future. Therefore, these entities represent a lower level of specificity than the two previous groups.       Epilepsies of unknown cause: Those epilepsies, which in the past were termed ‘‘cryptogenic,’’ will now be referred to as being of ‘‘unknown’’ cause.Table 2. Descriptors of focal seizures according to degree of impairment during seizure* Without impairment of consciousness or awarenesso With observable motor or autonomic components. This roughly corresponds to the concept of ‘‘simple partial seizure.?‘‘Focal motor’’ and ‘‘autonomic’’ are terms that may adequately convey this concept depending on the seizure manifestations).o Involving subjective sensory or psychic phenomena only. This corresponds to the concept of an aura, a term endorsed in the 2001 Glossary.* With impairment of consciousness or awareness. This roughly corresponds to the concept of complex partial seizure. ‘‘Dyscognitive’’ is a term that has been proposed for this concept (Blume et al., 2001).o Evolving to a bilateral, convulsiveb seizure (involving tonic, clonic,?or tonic and clonic components). This expression replaces the term ‘‘secondarily generalized seizure.’’aFor more descriptors that have been clearly defined and recommended for use, please see Blume et al., 2001.bThe term ‘‘convulsive’’ was considered a lay term in the Glossary; however, we note that it is used throughout medicine in various forms and translates well across many languages. Its use is, therefore, endorsed.Dimensions for classifying epilepsies and organizing information       In referring to syndromes, the dichotomy of focal versus generalized will be abandoned, that is, ‘‘the focal or generalized epilepsies.’’ This is intended to separate the manifestations from the underlying pathology that produced them.       Each syndrome and each patient can be characterized according to a large number of other features, which are often routinely part of any patient’s evaluation and which are essential features in distinguishing among established syndromes. These include the age at onset, cognitive and developmental antecedents and consequences, motor and sensory examinations, EEG features, provoking or triggering factors, and patterns of seizure occurrence with respect to sleep.Natural evolution of the disorder       Among the many dimensions that may be used for organizing forms of epilepsy, ‘‘natural’’ evolution is highlighted here because of its considerable importance in reflecting our growing understanding of the full nature of the epilepsies.       Epileptic encephalopathy. The concept of epileptic encephalopathy has grown in acceptance and use. It was formally recognized in the 2006 report and is now defined within this document. Epileptic encephalopathy embodies the notion that the epileptic activity itself may contribute to severe cognitive and behavioral impairments above and beyond what might be expected from the underlying pathology alone (e.g., cortical malformation), and that these can worsen over time. These impairments may be global or more selective and they may occur along a spectrum of severity. Although certain syndromes are often referred to as epileptic encephalopathies, the encephalopathic effects of seizures and epilepsy may potentially occur in association with any form of epilepsy.       Other concepts and terms. The terms catastrophic and benign are not recommended. The first has strong emotional overtones and thus is not considered an appropriate term for a diagnostic label or category. The second belies the growing understanding of the relationship between the epilepsies and a wide variety of brain disorders including cognitive, behavioral, and psychiatric illnesses as well as sudden death and suicide. ‘‘Benign’’ can be misleading and leave physicians, patients, and families unaware of and unprepared to address these associated disorders. That said, names of syndromes have not, at this time, been changed.An interim organization (‘‘classification’’) of the epilepsies       In a departure from the 1989 classification of the epilepsies, there is no one specific organization proposed for the revised classification. Instead, the various forms of epilepsy (at all levels of specificity) will be organized according to those dimensions that are most relevant to a specific purpose. These may be comparable to those in the 1989 classification (seizure onset, ‘‘etiology,’’ and age at onset), a different hierarchical arrangement of these same dimensions, a more detailed version of these dimensions, or by entirely different dimensions as needed. For example, Table 3 provides a list of epilepsies from the Task Force on Classification and Terminology (Engel, 2006) according to level of specificity and within those designations, by age where meaningful.
Table 3. Electroclinical syndromes and other epilepsies* Electroclinical syndromes arranged by age at onsetao Neonatal period* Benign familial neonatal epilepsy (BFNE) * Early myoclonic encephalopathy (EME) * Ohtahara syndromeo Infancy?* Epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures?* West syndrome?* Myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (MEI)?* Benign infantile epilepsy?* Benign familial infantile epilepsy?* Dravet syndrome?* Myoclonic encephalopathy in nonprogressive disorderso Childhood?* Febrile seizures plus (FS+) (can start in infancy) * Panayiotopoulos syndrome?* Epilepsy with myoclonic atonic (previously astatic) seizures * Benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS) * Autosomal-dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) * Late onset childhood occipital epilepsy (Gastaut type)?* Epilepsy with myoclonic absences?* Lennox-Gastaut syndrome?* Epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-and-wave during sleep (CSWS)b * Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS) * Childhood absence epilepsy (CAE)o Adolescence – Adult?* Juvenile absence epilepsy (JAE)?* Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME)?* Epilepsy with generalized tonic–clonic seizures alone * Progressive myoclonus epilepsies (PME)?* Autosomal dominant epilepsy with auditory features (ADEAF) * Other familial temporal lobe epilepsieso Less specific age relationship?* Familial focal epilepsy with variable foci (childhood to adult) * Reflex epilepsies* Distinctive constellations?o Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis (MTLE with HS)?o Rasmussen syndrome?o Gelastic seizures with hypothalamic hamartoma o Hemiconvulsion–hemiplegia–epilepsyo ?Epilepsies that do not fit into any of these diagnostic categories can be distinguished first on the basis of the presence or absence of a known structural or metabolic condition (presumed cause) and then on the basis of the primary mode of seizure onset (generalized vs. focal)* Epilepsies attributed to and organized by structural-metabolic causes o Malformations of cortical development (hemimegalencephaly, heterotopias, etc.)?o Neurocutaneous syndromes (tuberous sclerosis complex, Sturge-Weber, etc.) o Tumor?Infection?o Trauma* Angioma o Perinatal insults o Stroke?o Etc.* Epilepsies of unknown cause?* Conditions with epileptic seizures that are traditionally not diagnosed as a form of epilepsy per se o Benign neonatal seizures (BNS) o Febrile seizures (FS)aThe arrangement of electroclinical syndromes does not reflect etiology.bSometime referred to as Electrical Status Epilepticus during Slow Sleep (ESES).AcknowledgmentsDuring the Commission’s 2005–2009 term, input was sought from experts in the genetics of epilepsy, neuroimaging, therapeutics, pediatric and adult epileptology, as well as statistics and research design. The results of those deliberations were presented at the ICE in Budapest, 2009. Following comments received at the meeting, a written report was disseminated to the many ILAE chapters with an invitation to respond with feedback. The report was also posted on the ILAE website, again with an invitation to comment, and comments were posted on the website. We owe a special debt of gratitude to the many colleagues around the world who took the time to consider our proposals and convey their thoughts, suggestions, and critiques to us throughout this process. We also thank our colleagues Pawel Matykiewicz, Ruth Ottman, Philippe Ryvlin, and Peter Wolf for their input into some of our meetings. The process for approving this report followed that outlined in the Commission Operations Manual of the ILAE, 2009.We confirm that we have read the Journal’s position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those guidelines.
DisclosureNone of the authors has any conflict of interest to disclose.References1. Berg AT, Blackstone NW. (2006) Concepts in classification and their rele- vance to epilepsy. Epilepsy Res 70:11–19.2. Blume WT, Luders HO, Mizrahi E, Tassinari C, van Emde Boas W, Engel J. (2001) Glossary of ictal semiology. Epilepsia 42:1212–1218.3. Camfield P, Camfield C, Lortie A, Darwish H. (2003) Infantile spasms in remission may reemerge as intractable epileptic spasms. Epilepsia 44:1592–1595.4. Capovilla G, Berg AT, Cross JH, Moshe SL, Vigevano F, Wolf P, Avanzini G. (2009) Conceptual dichotomies in classifying epilepsies: partial ver- sus generalized and idiopathic versus symptomatic (April 18–20, 2008, Monreale, Italy). Epilepsia 50:1645–1649.5. Commission on Classification and Terminology of the International League Against Epilepsy. (1981) Proposal for revised clinical and electrograph- ic classification of epileptic seizures. Epilepsia 22:489–501.6. Commission on Classification and Terminology of the International League Against Epilepsy. (1989) Proposal for revised classification of epilep- sies and epileptic syndromes. Epilepsia 30:389–399.7. Engel J. (2001) A proposed diagnostic scheme for people with epileptic sei- zures and with epilepsy: report of the ILAE Task Force on Classifica- tion and Terminology. Epilepsia 42:796–803.8. Engel J. (2006) Report of the ILAE Classification Core Group. Epilepsia 47:1558–1568.9. Fisher RS, Boas WVE, Blume W, Elger C, Genton P, Lee P, Engel J. (2005) Epileptic seizures and epilepsy: definitions proposed by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and the International Bureau for Epilepsy (IBE). Epilepsia 46:470–472.10. Freitag H, Tuxhorn I. (2005) Cognitive function in preschool children after epilepsy surgery: rationale for early intervention. Epilepsia 46:561– 567.11. Gloor P. (1986) Consciousness as a neurological concept in epileptology: a critical review. Epilepsia 27(suppl 2):S14–S26.12. Goldstein J, Slomski J. (2008) Epileptic spasms: a variety of etiologies and associated syndromes. J Child Neurol 23:407–414.13. Guerrini R, Moro F, Kato M, Barkovich AJ, Shiihara T, McShane MA, Hurst J, Loi M, Tohyama J, Norci V, Hayasaka K, Kang UJ, Das S, Dobyns WB. (2007) Expansion of the first PolyA tract of ARX causes infantile spasms and status dystonicus. Neurology 69:427–433.14. Hermann BP, Seidenberg M, Dow C, Jones J, Rutecki P, Bhattacharya A, Bell B. (2006) Cognitive prognosis in chronic temporal lobe epilepsy. Ann Neurol 60:80–87.15. Johnsons JN, Hofman N, Haglund CM, Cascino GD, Wilde AAM, Ackerman MJ. (2009) Identification of a possible pathogenic link between congenital long QT syndrome and epilepsy. Neurology 72:224–231.16. Jonas R, Nguyen S, Hu B, Asarnow RF, LoPresti C, Curtiss S, de Bode S, Yudovin S, Shields WD, Vinters HV, Mathern GW. (2004) Cerebral hemispherectomy: hospital course, seizure, developmental, language, and motor outcomes. Neurology 62:1712–1721.17. Jonas R, Asarnow RF, LoPresti C, Yudovin S, Koh S, Wu JY, Sankar R, Shields WD, Vinters HV, Mathern GW. (2005) Surgery for symptom- atic infant-onset epileptic encephalopathy with and without infantile spasms. Neurology 64:746–750.18. Kelly MS, Jacobs MP, Lowenstein DH. (2009) The NINDS epilepsy research benchmarks. Epilepsia 50:579–582.19. Lerner JT, Salamon N, Hauptman JS, Velasco TR, Hemb M, Wu JY, San- kar R, Shields WD, Engel J, Fried I, Cepeda C, Andre VM, Levine MS, Miyata H, Yong WH, Vinters HV, Mathern GW. (2009) Assessment of surgical outcomes for mild type I and severe type II cortical dysplasia: a critical review and the UCLA experience. Epilepsia 50:1310–1335.20. Luders HO, Burgess R, Noachtar S. (1993) Expanding the international classification of seizures to provide localization information. Neurology 43:1650–1655.21. Lux AL, Edwards SW, Hancock E, Johnson AL, Kennedy CR, Newton RW, O’Callaghan FJ, Verity CM, Osborne JP. (2005) The United King- dom Infantile Spasms Study (UKISS) comparing hormone treatment with vigabatrin on developmental and epilepsy outcomes to age 14 months: a multicentre randomised trial. Lancet Neurol 4:712–717.22. Ottman R, Barker-Cummings C, Lee JH, Ranta S. (1999) Genetics of auto- somal dominant partial epilepsy with auditory features. In Berkovic SF, Genton P, Hirsch E, Picard F (Eds) Genetics of focal epilepsies. John Libbey & Co Ltd, London, pp. 95–102.23. Ottman R, Rosenberger L, Bagic A, Kamberakis K, Ritzl EK, Wohlschlag- er AM, Shamim S, Sato S, Liew C, Gaillard WD, Wiggs E, Berl MM, Reeves-Tyer P, Baker EH, Butman JA, Theodore WH. (2008) Altered language processing in autosomal dominant partial epilepsy with audi- tory features. Neurology 71:1973–1980.24. Saitsu H, Kato M, Mizuguchi T, Hamada K, Osaka H, Tohyama J, Uruno K, Kumada S, Nishiyama K, Nishimura A, Okada I, Yoshimura Y, Hirai S, Kumada T, Hayasaka K, Fukuda A, Ogata K, Matsumoto N. (2008) De novo mutations in the gene encoding STXBP1 (MUNC18-1) cause early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. Nat Genet 40:782–788.25. Scheffer IE, Bhatia KP, Lopes-Cendes I, Fish DR, Marsden CD, Ander- mann E, Andermann F, Desbiens R, Keene D, Cendes F, Manson JI, Constantinou JEC, McIntosh A, Berkovic SF. (1995) Autosomal domi- nant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy: a distinctive clinical disorder. Brain 118:61–73.26. Scheffer IE, Phillips HA, O’Brien CE, Saling MM, Wrennall JA, Wallace RH, Mulley JC, Berkovic SF. (1998) Familial partial epilepsy with vari- able foci: a new partial epilepsy syndrome with suggestion of linkage to chromosome 2. Ann Neurol 44:890–899.27. Scheffer IE, Turner SJ, Dibbens LM, Bayly MA, Friend K, Hodgson B, Burrows L, Shaw M, Wei C, Ullmann R, Ropers H-H, Szepe- towski P, Haan E, Mazarib A, Afawi Z, Neufeld MY, Andrews PI, Wallace G, Kivity S, Lev D, Lerman-Sagie T, Derry CP, Korczyn AD, Gecz J, Mulley JC, Berkovic SF. (2008) Epilepsy and mental retardation limited to females: an under-recognized disorder. Brain 131:918–927.28. Stromme P, Mangelsdorf ME, Shaw MA, Lower KM, Lewis SM, Bruyere H, Lutcherath V, Gedeon AK, Wallace RH, Scheffer IE, Turner G, Par- tington M, Frints SG, Fryns JP, Sutherland GR, Mulley JC, Gecz J. (2002) Mutations in the human ortholog of Aristaless cause X-linked mental retardation and epilepsy. Nat Genet 30:441–445.29. Taylor I, Berkovic SF, Kivity S, Scheffer IE. (2008) Benign occipital epi- lepsies of childhood: clinical features and genetics. Brain 131:2287– 2294.30. Vadlamudi I, Kjeldsen MJ, Corey LA, Solaas MH, Friis ML, Pellock JM, Nakken KO, Milne RL, Scheffer IE, Harvey SA, Hopper JL, Berkovic SF. (2006) Analyzing the etiology of benign rolandic epilepsy: a multi- center twin collaboration. Epilepsia 47:550–555.31. York GK, Steinberg DA. (2009) Hughlings Jackson’s suggestion for the treatment of epilepsy. Neurology 73:1155–1158.